                                                               
 Document s0ascers                                 INSPECT ONLY
   1  Introduction                                              
   2  Applicable documents                                      
   3  Terminal-host communications                              
   4  Resident-Micro PLATO interface                            
   5  Appendix A: PLATO character set                           
   6  Appendix B: Protocol summary                              
   7  Appendix C: Processor information                         
   8  Appendix D: PLATO keycodes                                
   9  Appendix E: Existing terminals                            
  10  Appendix F: Serial channel control                       
  11  Appendix G: Win/Mac -ext- codes       
  12  Change history                        

 1  Introduction                                               
                                                               
   DISCLAIMER: This document is an internal working paper only.
   It is unapproved and subject to change, and does not        
   necessarily represent any official intent on the part of    
   Control Data Corporation.                                   
                                                               
   This document describes the ASCII PLATO host-terminal       
   communications protocol.                                    
                                                               
   It outlines the general principles of writing a PLATO       
   resident (a program which communicates with the host        
   system) and how hardware of differing capabilities might be 
   programmed for use with PLATO.                              
                                                               
   The interface between the resident and the Micro PLATO      
   system (which runs in the machine with the resident and     
   makes calls upon it) is also described.  If Micro PLATO     
   is to be used with the resident, care must be taken in      
   writing the low-level routines so that both the host        
   communications code and the Micro PLATO interface code      
   can easily call them.                                       
                                                               
  2  Applicable documents                                        
                                                                 
    EIA RS-232C               Interface between data terminal    
                              epuipment and data communication   
                              equipment employing serial binary  
                              data interchange.                  
    CDC-STD 1.80.000          Programming Standards              
    CDC-STD 1.01.103          Software development documentation 
    CDC-STD 1.01.105          External reference specification   
    CDC-SPEC 16042866         ASCII IST-II Equipment Spec.       
    CDC-SPEC 16042871         ASCII IST-II ROM Resident ERS      
    CDC-SPEC 16042872         ASCII IST-III PLATO ERS            
    CDC-SPEC 16042873         ASCII IST-III Graphics ERS         
    CDC-SPEC 16042874         ASCII IST-III Timeshare ERS        
    CDC 62940006              CDC 40003-22/23 IST-III Op. Guide  
    CDC 62940007              CDC 40003-22/23 IST-III Hardware   
                              Maintenance Manual                 
    CDC-SPEC 16042886         Viking X Equipment Specification   
    CDC-SPEC 16042887         Viking X Graphics Option           
    CDC-SPEC 16042888         Viking X ROM Resident ERS          
    CDC-SPEC 16042889         Viking X Dual Asynchronous Serial  
                              Interface                          
    CDC-SPEC 16042890         Viking X Parallel Interface        
 
 3  Terminal-host communications                                
                                                                
 3.1  General overview                                          
                                                                
 3.1.1  The PLATO terminal model                                
                                                                
   The ASCII PLATO communications protocol assumes a certain    
   terminal model.  A particular terminal may not have all      
   the capabilities of this model, and the resident must        
   compensate in software for the differences between the       
   actual hardware and the PLATO terminal model.  The following 
   sections describe features of the model and how they might   
   be dealt with in a machine that lacks those features.        
                                                                
   A summary of the characteristics of terminals which have     
   been adapted for use with PLATO is included in Appendix E.   
                                                               
 3.1.1.1  Screen resolution                                     
                                                                
   The PLATO terminal model has a screen resolution of          
   512 by 512 pixels with a square (1:1) aspect ratio.  All     
   screen coordinates are based on this.                        
                                                                
   The screen has 32 lines of 64 characters each.               
                                                                
   The coordinate (0,0) is assumed to be at the lower lefthand  
   corner of the screen.  The coordinate (511,511) is at the    
   upper righthand corner.                                      
                                                                
   A terminal which has only a 256 vertical by 512 horizontal   
   screen with a 2:1 aspect ratio would scale all vertical      
   coordinates by dividing all Y coordinates by two.  A         
   terminal with 384 vertical by 512 horizontal and a 3:4       
   aspect ratio would multiply Y coordinates by 3/4.  If a      
   terminal has a resolution of some odd size, say, 720h by     
   400v and a 3:4 aspect ratio, scaling by 400/512 would not be 
   appropriate.  It would be best to scale by 3/4 and only     
   use the center 512h by 384v area in the center of the       
   screen.                                                     
                                                               
   Distortion may be unavoidable on some terminals in order    
   to obtain the entire 512 pixel horizontal resolution.       
   This is the recommended horizontal resolution.  With it, 64 
   characters of eight pixels width can fit across the screen. 
   If this is not possible due to the limitations of the target
   hardware, a method of scrolling across the screen to view a 
   portion of the entire display might be considered.          
                                                               
 3.1.1.2  Character sets                                       
                                                               
   A PLATO terminal has two character fonts: the standard      
   font and the loadable font.  (These are further subdivided  
   into character memories, but that is an implementation      
   detail.)                                                    
                                                               
   Each character is 16 pixels high by 8 wide.  The standard   
   font is fixed and unchangeable.  It should be designed with 
   the target hardware specifically in mind for the best       
   display because this character set is what users will see   
   most frequently.  In a machine with 256v by 512h resolution 
   an 8 by 8 character grid would be required.                 
                                                               
   The loadable font (also known as the alternate character    
   set) is transmitted to the terminal from the host or loaded 
   from Micro PLATO as bit maps of the characters.  The        
   terminal resident must interpret these bit maps according to
   the needs of the hardware.  A character might be transformed
   from 16 by 8 to 12 by 8 in a machine with 384v by 512h      
   screen resolution.                                          
                                                               
   This transformation will result in lost information when    
   the target character size is smaller than the model's.  One 
   method when the target size is 8 by 8 is to logically or    
   lines one and two, three and four, etc., to form an 8 by    
   8 character from the 16 by 8 bit image.                     
                                                               
 3.1.1.3  Keyboard                                             
                                                               
   The PLATO keyboard (often referred to as 'keyset') contains 
   the standard set of alphanumeric keys, plus a set of        
   specially named function keys, and another set of special   
   mathematical and programming symbols.  These keys all       
   generate standard seven-bit ASCII character codes, but the  
   host assigns them different interpretations from the        
   standard set.                                               
                                                               
   One difference between the PLATO keyboard and many others   
   is that any key can be shifted to produce a different code, 
   including function keys such as ENTER (alias RETURN, and    
   called NEXT on PLATO).  Some keyboards may not be able to   
   detect such shifted function keys.  In that case, those     
   keys must be assigned to other keys on the keyboard, or     
   assigned a multiple-key combination (shift-NEXT might be    
   entered as ESC RETURN, and turned into the appropriate      
   single character by the resident).                          
   The standard PLATO keyset does not have certain characters   
   explicitly labeled on it (such as @, #, etc.).  These        
   characters are generated on PLATO by multiple keypresses.    
   Other terminals, however, do have these keys and must        
   generate the appropriate two-character sequence when the     
   user presses the key.                                        
                                                                
   The PLATO to ASCII keycode mapping is shown in Appendix D.   
                                                                
 3.1.1.4  Auxiliary input devices                               
                                                                
   The standard PLATO terminal has an auxiliary input device    
   used for pointing at objects on the screen.  On Control Data 
   terminals, this is a clear plastic touch panel placed over   
   the display.  The touchpanel is not active all the time.     
   It is turned on only when the appropriate command is         
   received from the host.                                      
                                                                
   The touch panel divides the screen into a 16 by 16 square    
   grid.  Each square therefore covers a 32 by 32 pixel square  
   area of the screen.  When communicating these touch panel    
   coordinates upline, the lower lefthand corner is (0,0) and   
   the upper righthand corner is (15,15).                       
                                                                
   The touchpanel can be simulated in a number of ways.  A      
   mouse, a light pen or even a joystick linked to a cursor     
   could be used as a replacement.                              
                                                                
 3.1.1.5  Other I/O devices                                     
                                                                
   There are other devices (most notably serial I/O devices)    
   that can be connected to PLATO terminals.  Commands are      
   available from the PLATO host to output data to and receive  
   data from these devices.  The Micro PLATO system can also    
   access these devices through the calls specified in section  
   4.2.                                                         
                                                                
 3.1.1.6  Color                                                 
                                                                
   The protocol supports the specification of foreground and    
   background colors for display.  Colors values are 24 bits    
   in length, with 8 bit intensities for red, green and blue.   
   The PLATO host will not send color commands to terminals     
   which it does not think have color.                          
                                                                
   When one color is written on top of another color, the       
   old color is replaced by the new color: they are not         
   additive.  This will be described in further detail in       
   the sections on screen modes (see 3.2.3.1.1).                
                                                                
 3.1.1.7  Screen printing                                       
                                                                
   The standard PLATO resident has the ability to make a copy   
   of the screen on a printer in graphics mode.  The screen     
   copy can be initiated by a keypress or under program control 
   (see section 4.2.26).                                        
                                                                
 3.1.2  Resident modes and data formats                         
                                                                
   The word 'mode' is used in three different ways when         
   discussing the resident's operation.                         
                                                                
   The highest level is the PLATO versus TTY mode.  In PLATO    
   mode graphics commands are received and interpreted.  In TTY 
   mode only very simple functions are performed.  Therefore    
   a PLATO resident must actually be two programs in one:       
   the first is a 'dumb TTY' emulator, which is used to get the 
   user into the PLATO host; the second is the PLATO resident   
   proper.                                                      
                                                                
   The intermediate level of 'mode' is how the resident         
   interprets the data it receives (data mode).  For example,   
   the resident will be in text (character generation) mode     
   when displaying text, line mode when drawing lines, block    
   mode when drawing filled boxes, etc.  There are eight or     
   more of these modes, depending on how one counts.            
                                                                
   The lowest level mode indicates how data should be displayed 
   on the screen (screen mode).  In text mode, for example, the 
   resident can be in 'mode write', where characters are        
   basically ored into screen memory.  Or the resident can be   
   in mode inverse, which causes text to be displayed black on  
   white instead of white on black (i.e., the background and    
   foreground colors are reversed).  There are four of these    
   modes: rewrite, write, erase and inverse.  In some data      
   modes these four screen modes become only two.  This will be 
   explained in greater detail in the section on data modes.    
                                                                
   Micro PLATO is not concerned with the data mode because      
   it calls the graphics routines directly.  Micro PLATO will   
   never be in TTY mode, but it must operate while the host     
   communications portion of the resident is in TTY mode.       
   Micro PLATO uses the same definitions for screen modes,      
   though the screen mode for Micro PLATO is set by a           
   subroutine call.                                             
                                                                
 3.1.2.1  TTY and PLATO modes                                   
                                                                
   The TTY mode need not be complicated.  A bare minimum is     
   that it operate in half-duplex (that is, echo what the user  
   types on the screen) and display what it receives on the     
   screen.  It must also be able to recognize the escape        
   sequence to select PLATO mode.                               
                                                                
   The PLATO mode of the resident is much more sophisticated.   
   It receives the data from the PLATO host and displays        
   the corresponding graphics and text.                         
                                                                
   There are escape sequences (detailed later) which switch     
   between the PLATO and TTY modes of the resident.             
                                                                
 3.1.2.2  Data modes                                            
                                                                
   When the terminal is in PLATO mode, there are a number of    
   data modes which are used to transmit the graphics           
   primitives: text, lines, points, blocks, character sets,     
   raw data and data for programs that are running              
   concurrently with the resident (in particular, Micro PLATO). 
    The mode is selected by means of a control character or an  
   escape sequence.  The terminal must remain in that mode     
   until it receives another mode command.                     
                                                               
 3.1.2.3  Commands                                             
                                                               
   The terminal can at any time receive a command which        
   should be executed immediately.  Commands do not affect the 
   current mode (except for commands such as the revert to     
   TTY mode command).                                          
                                                               
   For example, when in text mode, the resident can receive    
   characters which are plotted on the screen, then receive    
   a Select Size 2 command, which causes subsequent text to    
   be displayed twice as large, then receive the Select Size   
   1 command, which would return character size to normal.     
                                                               
 3.1.2.4  Transmission formats                                 
                                                               
   Data modes and commands require data to be in certain       
   formats.  These formats consist of one or more bytes with   
   their interpretation depending on what the particular mode  
   or command needs.                                           
                                                               
   All data characters are greater than 32 decimal (20 hex)    
   to avoid confusion with control characters.                 
                                                               
   There are three basic formats used to transmit data to the  
   terminal: bytes, words and coordinates.  Some commands have 
   data in formats that do not fall into any of these groups.  
   These will be dealt with in the individual command           
   descriptions.                                                
                                                                
   (Note: Bits are numbered right to left from one.  That       
   is, the least significant bit is numbered one.)              
                                                                
 3.1.2.4.1  Bytes                                               
                                                                
   Bytes are used in text mode to display characters.  Each     
   character received is plotted on the screen after being      
   mapped through the currently selected character set memory.  
                                                                
 3.1.2.4.2  Words                                               
                                                                
   Words are used to transmit logical quantities greater than   
   eight bits in length.  For example, when loading character   
   sets, sixteen bits at a time are transmitted in character    
   set load mode.  Each word is encoded in three eight bit      
   bytes.  The format of these three bytes is:                  
                                                                
                                                                
        3rd Character      2nd Character      1st character     
          received           received           received        
        P 1 X X X X X X    P 1 X X X X X X    P 1 X X X X X X   
            b18-------b13      b12-------b7       b6--------b1  
                                                                
                                                                
   Each byte contains six bits of data in the lower part of     
   the byte.  The next bit of the byte is always a 1.  This     
   ensures that data will not be interpreted as a command.      
                                                               
    The high bit is the parity bit, and is not relevant at this  
   point.                                                       
                                                                
   For example, an echo command (see section 3.2.3.1.4) to      
   query the terminal's subtype requires a word, of which seven 
   bits are used.  The value is 71 hex.  The entire command     
   would be                                                     
                                                                
        ESC Y q A @ (1B 59 71 41 40 hex).                       
                                                                
 3.1.2.4.3  Coordinates                                        
                                                               
   Coordinates are used to specify positions on the screen.    
   They can be from one to four bytes in length.  The point,   
   line and block modes, as well as the load coordinate        
   command, accept data in coordinate format.                  
                                                               
   The X and Y coordinates are converted to a sequence of      
   four ASCII characters according to the following table:     
                                                               
                 bit 7   bit 6   bits 5 through 1              
        high Y       0       1       5 MSB of Y coordinate     
        low Y        1       1       5 LSB of Y coordinate     
        high X       0       1       5 MSB of X coordinate     
        low X        1       0       5 LSB of X coordinate     
                                                               
   (MSB = Most significant bits.  LSB = least significant bits.
   Note that the coordinate is actually 10 bits in width.  The 
   top bit is always zero, always giving screen positions in   
   the range 0 to 511.)                                        
                                                               
   To save transmission time, not all the bytes are sent if    
   certain requirements are met.  The omitted bytes must be    
   'understood' by the terminal to be the same as the bytes of 
   the last coordinate.  Since bits 6 and 7 uniquely identify  
   the low Y and the low X, and the high Y and high X can be   
   distinguished from each other by context, all four bytes of 
   the coordinate will not be transmitted if a portion of the  
   last coordinate matches the new coordinate.  For example, if
   the previous coordinate is (0,0), and the next coordinate is
   (10,0), only one byte (the byte describing the 5 lower bits 
   of the new X coordinate) will be transmitted.  If the       
   coordinate following that is (30,30), only two bytes (for   
   low Y and low X) will be sent.                           
                                                               
   The following table shows the coordinate byte transmission  
   requirements.                                               
                                                               
        COORDINATE BYTE TRANSMISSION REQUIREMENTS              
                                                               
        BYTES WHICH CHANGE           BYTE TRANSMISSION REQUIRED
   High Y  Low Y  High X  Low X    High Y  Low Y  High X  Low X
                             X                               X 
                     X                       X       X       X 
             X                               X               X 
      X                              X                       X 
                     X       X               X       X       X 
             X               X               X               X 
       X                     X       X                       X 
             X       X                       X       X       X 
       X             X               X       X       X       X 
       X     X                       X       X               X 
             X       X       X               X       X       X 
       X             X       X       X       X       X       X 
       X     X               X       X       X               X 
       X     X       X               X       X       X       X 
       X     X       X       X       X       X       X       X 
   Sending Initial address           X       X       X       X 
   Returning to remembered address                           X 
                                                               
                                                               
   The general rules are: 1) the order of the bytes is high Y, 
   low Y, high X and low X (the low X coordinate is always sent
   last to indicate the termination of the coordinate); and    
   2), if the high X coordinate is changed, at least one of the

   Y coordinates is sent (so that the high X can be            
   distinguished from the high Y).                             
                                                               
   For example, a load coordinate command (section 3.2.3.1.3)  
   takes a coordinate as data.  To set the (X,Y) position to   
   (0,0), the sequence                                         
                                                               
        ESC 2 SP ` SP @ (1B 32 20 60 20 40 hex)                
                                                               
   would be sent.  To move to (10,0) thereafter would be:      
                                                               
        ESC 2 J  (1B 32 4A hex)                                
                                                               
   and to move to (30,30) after that would be:                 
                                                               
        ESC 2 ~ ^  (1B 32 7E 5E hex)                           

 3.1.3  Current (X,Y) screen location                          
                                                               
   The current (X,Y) location on the screen is an important    
   piece of information, used heavily by the resident.  After a
   graphics object is put on the screen, the (X,Y) location is 
   updated.  The next object plotted may use this location as  
   the starting point, updating the current (X,Y) location in  
   turn.                                                       
                                                               
 3.1.4  Flow control                                           
                                                               
   At higher communications rates (greater than 1200 bps) it   
   may not be possible for terminals to keep up with the output
   of the PLATO host.  To prevent the terminal from losing data
   a method of flow control has been instituted.  This uses the
   XON/XOFF protocol.                                          
                                                               
   When the terminal has determined that it is in danger of    
   losing data, it sends an XOFF to the host.  The host will   
   then wait until the terminal sends an XON to indicate that  
   it has caught up and is again ready to receive data from the
   host.                                                       
                                                               
   Unfortunately, the characters used for XON and XOFF were    
   also used for PLATO keypresses (the XON character is        
   control-Q [DC1] and the XOFF character is control-S [DC3].  
   These correspond to shift-STOP and SUPER in the original    
   PLATO ASCII protocol).                                      

   Thus, to allow flow control to work, the keyboard mapping   
   must be changed.  However, since the PLATO host must commu- 
   nicate with terminals that have not been changed to work    
   with flow control, the old keyboard mapping must also be    
   retained.                                                   
                                                               
   To activate flow control the host must send a special query 
   to the terminal to find out whether the terminal supports   
   flow control.  This query is implemented in the form of an  
   echo code that will, when received, turn flow control on in 
   the terminal and cause it to use the flow control           
   keymapping, freeing the XON and XOFF characters for their   
   proper use.  A resident that supports flow control responds 
   to that code with a special echo reply, rather than echoing 
   the code back verbatim.                                     
                                                               
   When the host receives that reply, it knows that the        
   terminal is capable of using flow control, so it changes the
   way it interprets the terminal's keys, and activates flow   
   control handling in the terminal interface software.  If the
   host receives a verbatim echo, it knows that the terminal   
   cannot use flow control and will treat the terminal in the  
   old fashion (using the non-flow control keymapping).        
                                                               
   Occasionally the host will continue to send data after an   
   XOFF has been sent.  It may be the case that an XOFF was    
   lost or that the host takes several character times to      
   respond to the terminal's XOFF.  The terminal may have to   
   send a few XOFFs (four or five) before the host stops       
   transmitting.  However, it should avoid sending a constant  
   stream of XOFFs to the host.                                
                                                               
   A terminal that supports flow control has the following     
   responsibilities:                                           
                                                               
        1) It must start out with flow control off and the     
        original keyboard mapping.                             
                                                               
        2) It must respond to the flow control echo code with  
        the appropriate reply, and switch to the flow control  
        keymapping.                                            
                                                               
        3) It must send all keys the user presses with the     
        flow control keymapping (including keys sent from      
        Micro PLATO through the R.XMIT entry point) when flow  
        control has been turned on in the terminal.            
                                                               
        4) It must send the XOFF character (DC3, 13 hex) to    
        turn off host output when the buffer is in danger      
        of overrun.                                            
                                                               
        5) It must send the XON character (DC1, 11 hex) to     
        turn on host output again when the buffer is out of    
        the danger zone.                                       
                                                               
        6) If the user presses a key while flow control has    
        been invoked (i.e., an XOFF was sent, but not an XON)  
        an XON should be sent before the user's key.  This is  
        to keep the bookkeeping straight because some host     
        terminal interface programs assume that any key from   
        the terminal is equivalent to an XON, and will turn  
        host output on again.
                                
        7) It must turn off flow control and revert to the     
        original keymapping when it is placed back in TTY      
        mode.                                                  
                                                               
 3.2  Resident-host communications protocol                    
                                                               
   The following sections describe in detail the PLATO ASCII   
   communications protocol.                                    
                                                               
 3.2.1  Transmission characteristics                           
                                                               
   All characters sent to and received from the PLATO host     
   consist of seven data bits, plus a bit of even parity.      
   The parity on data received from the PLATO host can be      
   ignored, but parity ____ be set correctly on data sent      
   to the PLATO host from the terminal, because data with      
   bad parity will be discarded.                               
                                                               
   One stop bit is required.                                   
                                                               
   The resident should be able to handle data from the host at 
   1200 bits per second, or approximately 120 characters per   
   second.  It is recommended that the receive communications  
   channel be interrupt driven to ensure that no overrun occurs
   when the resident is engaged in lengthy operations or when  
   Micro PLATO is in control. The resident should also         
   accommodate 300 BPS transmission, and higher rates as       
   desired (direct connection to the PLATO host can offer rates
   up to 19.2 KBPS).  For these higher rates flow control may  
   be required.                                                
   The PLATO system runs in full duplex.  That is, the host,    
   rather than the modem, network or terminal, echos all        
   characters to the screen.                                    
                                                                
 3.2.2  TTY mode requirements                                   
                                                                
   The TTY mode of the resident must be able to respond to      
   the standard ASCII character set and control set.  It should 
   operate in half duplex (the network connecting the terminal  
   to the PLATO host runs in half duplex).                      
                                                                
   The TTY mode must be able to recognize at least one escape   
   sequence: ESC STX.  This is the command from the PLATO       
   host to the terminal to enter PLATO mode.                    
                                                                
 3.2.3  PLATO mode requirements                                 
                                                                
 3.2.3.1  Command formats                                       
                                                                
   Control characters and escape sequences are used to control  
   the terminal's mode (text, point, line, etc.) and to         
   issue commands (such as erase screen, set writing mode,      
   and so forth).  The following sections describe the commands 
   and modes and detail the control codes and escape sequences  
   to use them.                                                 
                                                                
   Appendix B is a summary of the PLATO operation control codes 
   and escape sequences.                                        

   There are four 'screen modes' that control how graphics are 
   written to the screen.  They are called mode write, mode    
   erase, mode rewrite and mode inverse.  All four screen modes
   are available in text mode.  In the other data modes, mode  
   rewrite reduces to mode write and mode inverse reduces to   
   mode erase (i.e., a line drawn in mode inverse will be      
   black on a monochrome display).                             
                                                               
 3.2.3.1.1.1  Mode write                                       
                                                               
   Mode write is the screen mode that is most used by the      
   PLATO system.  It is useful to think of mode write as being 
   an 'or' function, where the object being drawn on the screen
   (be it a character, line, point, or box) is merged with what
   is already present.                                         
                                                               
   With solid graphic objects (lines, points and blocks), the  
   object is simply put where it belongs.  Characters are not  
   so simple.  Wherever there is an 'on' pixel in the          
   character's bit map the corresponding pixel in the screen   
   should be turned on.  With a monochrome display this can be 
   accomplished with an 'or', but with a color display it must 
   be interpreted differently.  For color, wherever there is an
   'on' pixel in the character, the corresponding pixel must be
   set to the foreground color.  Any 'off' pixels in the       
   character must be left alone in the corresponding screen    
   pixel.                                                      
                                                               
   The escape sequence to set the screen mode to mode write is 
   ESC DC2 (1B 12 hex).                                        
   Mode erase can be considered to be the opposite of mode    
   write.  For the solid graphic objects, pixels are turned   
   'off'.  For characters, the screen pixels corresponding to 
   the 'on' pixels in the character are turned 'off'.  This is
   a complement and 'and' operation for monochrome displays:  
   screen_pixel = screen_pixel AND NOT(character_pixel).      
                                                              
   For color it means that the screen pixels corresponding to 
   the 'on' character pixels must be set to the background    
   color.  Any 'off' pixels must be left alone.               
                                                              
   The escape sequence to set mode erase is: ESC DC3 (1B 13   
   hex). 

 3.2.3.1.1.2  Mode erase                                        
                                                                
   Mode erase can be considered to be the opposite of mode      
   write.  For the solid graphic objects, pixels are turned     
   'off'.  For characters, the screen pixels corresponding to   
   the 'on' pixels in the character are turned 'off'.  This is  
   a complement and 'and' operation for monochrome displays:    
   screen_pixel = screen_pixel AND NOT(character_pixel).        
                                                                
   For color it means that the screen pixels corresponding to   
   the 'on' character pixels must be set to the background      
   color.  Any 'off' pixels must be left alone.                 
                                                                
   The escape sequence to set mode erase is: ESC DC3 (1B 13     
   hex).                                                        
                                                              
 3.2.3.1.1.3  Mode rewrite                                    
                                                              
   Mode rewrite is akin to what is found on most 'dumb' TTY   
   terminals.  For graphic objects mode rewrite is the same   
   as mode write, but for text it is much different.  It is   
   a straight assignment operation.  In monochrome, the       
   character is placed directly into screen memory, with on   
   pixels turned on and off pixels turned off.  This writes   
   over (rewrites) whatever was previously displayed in the   
   character area.                                            
                                                              
   In color, the 'on' pixels are set to foreground color and  
   the 'off' pixels are set to background.                    
                                                              
   The escape sequence to set mode rewrite is ESC DC4 (1B 14  
   hex).                                                      
   Mode inverse is the 'opposite' of mode rewrite.  It is also 
   an assignment, but the character is complemented before     
   being written into screen memory.  In monochrome, every 'on'
   pixel in the character is turned 'off' on the screen and    
   every 'off' pixel in the character is turned 'on'.          
   For solid graphic objects mode inverse is the same as mode  
   erase.                                                      
                                                               
   In color every 'on' character pixel is set to the background
   color and every 'off' character pixel is set to the         
   foreground color.                                           
                                                               
   The escape sequence to set mode inverse is ESC DC1 (1B 11   
   hex).                                                       
                                                               
 3.2.3.1.2  Data modes                                         
                                                               
   There are a number of modes in which the terminal processes 
   data received from the host.  These modes are selected by   
   control characters or escape sequences.  Data sent by the   
   PLATO host is interpreted by each mode according to         
   the data formats described in section 3.1.2.4.              
                                                               
 3.2.3.1.2.1  Point mode                                       
                                                               
   The PLATO host sends an FS code (1C hex) to the             
   terminal to put it in point mode (also known as mode 0).    
   In this mode screen coordinates are sent to the terminal.   
   These coordinates are in the format described in section    
   3.1.2.4.3.  With a monochrome display device, the pixel is  
   turned on in modes write and rewrite and turned off in modes 
   erase and inverse.                                           
                                                                
   With a color display the pixel is set to the foreground      
   color in modes write and rewrite.  It is set to the          
   background color in modes erase and inverse.                 
                                                                
   The current (X,Y) position is left at this location.         

 
 3.2.3.1.2.2  Line mode                                        
                                                               
   In line mode line segments are drawn on the screen.  Line   
   mode (also known as mode 1) is entered by receiving a GS (1D
   hex) code.  In this mode, coordinates are sent to the       
   terminal.  The first coordinate received after transition to
   line mode only sets the first coordinate of the first line  
   (no line is drawn).  Thereafter, subsequent coordinates     
   cause a line to be drawn from the previous coordinate to the
   current coordinate.  The (X,Y) coordinate is left at its    
   latest position when line mode is exited.                   
                                                               
   In mode write and mode rewrite, pixels are turned 'on' with 
   monochrome and set to the foreground color with color.  In  
   modes erase and inverse pixels are turned 'off' with        
   monochrome and set to the background color with color.      

 3.2.3.1.2.3  Load memory mode                                 
                                                               
   Load memory mode (also known as mode 2) is used for two     
   different purposes.  One is to load character sets into     
   the terminal's programmable font, and the other is to load  
   either executable code or binary data into terminal memory. 
   When loading character sets a conversion is usually required
   to reformat the character into a usable form.  Many         
   terminals will not use the raw data mode for loading memory 
   because they cannot execute the Z80 instruction set.        
                                                               
   Before (and during) this mode, the PLATO host will send     
   load memory address commands (see section 3.2.3.1.5) to     
   specify where in memory the data should be loaded.  The base
   to be used depends on the terminal type.  Use the following 
   table to determine which base is necessary.                 
                                                               
        ________                     ____                      
        IST I                        2340H                     
        IST II                       2340H                     
        IST III (short ASCII)        2340H                     
        Viking                       2340H                     
        IST III (long ASCII)         3800H                     
        Other microcomputers         3800H                     
                                                               
   The PLATO host will assume that the terminal's alternate    
   character set memories start at the base.  The character set
   area is 800 hex bytes long.  If the terminal cannot load the
   character set at that location (the case for most non-CDC   
   terminals) it must adjust the addresses and store the       
   character set somewhere else.                               
                                                                
   In load memory mode data is received in 16-bit words (see   
   section 3.1.2.4.2 for a description).  The resident must    
   maintain a variable which keeps track of the current load   
   memory address, set by the load memory address command.     
   This address must be incremented by two for each word       
   received.                                                   
                                                               
   Load character set mode is initiated by the escape sequence 
   ESC P (1B 50 hex).  Each character consists of eight words  
   of data.  Each word is a vertical strip of the 16 high by 8 
   wide character.  Bit one is at the bottom and bit 16 is at  
   the top when the character is displayed on the screen.  Many
   terminals' screen memories are not mapped to accommodate    
   display of characters in this format, so it may be desirable
   to reformat the characters so that they are 16 bytes of     
   eight-bit horizontal strips.  The reformatting should take  
   place after each character is received (i.e., after every   
   eight words).                                               
                                                                                                                 
   The following is an example of a character and the data   
   words that would be transmitted from PLATO to form it:    
                                                             
             Bit                                             
                   ---------------                           
             16   | | | | | | | | |                          
             15   | | | | | | | | |                          
             14   | | | | | | | | |                          
             13   | | | | | | | | |                          
             12   | | | | | | | | |                          
             11   | | | | | | | | |                          
             10   | |o|o|o|o| | | |                          
              9   | | | | | |o| | |                          
              8   | |o|o|o|o|o| | |                          
              7   |o| | | | |o| | |                          
              6   |o| | | | |o| | |                          
              5   | |o|o|o|o| |o| |                          
              4   | | | | | | | | |                          
              3   | | | | | | | | |                          
              2   | | | | | | | | |                          
              1   | | | | | | | | |                          
                   ---------------                           
                                                             
        Word       1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8                           
                                                             
   The eight words for this character are (in hex):          
                                                             
        0060                                                 
        0290                                                 
        0290                                                 
        0290                                                    
        0290                                                    
        01E0                                                    
        0010                                                    
        0000                                                    
                                                                
   The programmable character sets are not always completely    
   utilized.  If there are gaps in the character set, new load  
   memory address commands will be sent to skip over the holes. 
   The resident must account for this when receiving character  
   sets.                                                        
                                                                
   The other memory load mode is initiated with the escape      
   sequence ESC S (1B 53 hex).  In this mode words are written  
   into terminal memory at the address specified by the current 
   load memory address.  The low order byte (bits one to eight) 
   is stored first, then the high order byte (bits 9 to 16) is  
   stored in the following byte in memory.  The load memory     
   address is then incremented by two.  Data received in this   
   mode must not be converted.                                  
                                                                
   Non-CDC terminals should ignore all data received in this    
   mode.
                                                        
   The PLATO host puts the terminal in text mode (mode 3)      
   with a US (1F hex) control character.  In this data mode    
   characters and text positioning commands are used to        
   display text.                                               
                                                               
 3.2.3.1.2.4.1  Character memories                             
                                                               
   There are four character memories, known as M0, M1, M2 and  
   M3.  There are provisions built into the protocol to        
   accommodate up to eight character memories, but only these  
   four are currently in use.  M0 and M1 are constant.  M2 and 
   M3 are the programmable font.                               
                                                               
   M0 contains the standard 96-character ASCII set.            
                                                               
   M1 contains the PLATO extended character set.  These are    
   the special characters that PLATO uses which are not        
   available in the standard ASCII set.  The characters are    
   illustrated in appendix A.                                  
                                                               
   M2 is the first half of the programmable font.  Character   
   slots zero through 63 are placed in this character memory.  
   The character set is loaded in the load memory mode (see    
   section 3.2.3.1.2.3).                                       
                                                               
   M3 is the second half of the programmable font.  Character  
   slots 64 through 127 are placed in this character memory.   
                                                               
   There are eight commands to select the current character    
   memory.  The resident must start out with M0 as the default.
   When the PLATO host requires characters from the other      
   character memories it will send down the appropriate        
   command.  The sequences for the commands are:               
                                                               
        ESC B (1B 42): select M0                               
        ESC C (1B 43): select M1                               
        ESC D (1B 44): select M2                               
        ESC E (1B 45): select M3                                
        ESC F (1B 46): select M4                                
        ESC G (1B 47): select M5                                
        ESC H (1B 48): select M6                                
        ESC I (1B 49): select M7                                
                                                                
   When a data character is received in text mode it is used    
   as an index into the current character memory, and this      
   bit map is put onto the screen in the current screen mode    
   at the current (X,Y) location.                               
                                                                
 3.2.3.1.2.4.2  Character sizing commands                       
                                                                
   Two character sizes should be available: size 0 (normal) and 
   size 2 (bold).  Size 2 characters are simply normal          
   characters doubled in size, and are therefore 32 high by 16  
   wide.  Size 2 also causes all character (and control         
   functions) to perform on this greater scale.  That is, after 
   a size 2 character is plotted, the current X position will   
   be increased by 16 rather than by 8.                         
                                                                
   Size 0 is the default size when the resident starts up.      
                                                                
   Any other sizing of characters is done by the PLATO host     
   with line drawings.                                          
                                                                
   The sequence to select size 0 is ESC N (1B 4E hex).  The     
   size 2 sequence is ESC O (1B 4F).                            

 3.2.3.1.2.4.3  Text direction commands                         
                                                                
   Text can be plotted in four directions, controlled by        
   text direction commands.  The horizontal or vertical axis    
   and the direction along that axis are selected with these    
   commands.  They control how the screen position is set       
   after a character is plotted or a control function executed. 
                                                                
   Forward plotting is selected by ESC L (1B 4C hex).  This is  
   the normal (and default) setting for the direction.  The     
   size of the character along the current axis is added to the 
   current position along that axis to produce the next screen  
   position.  The other coordinate is not changed.  For         
   example, a size 0 character plotted horizontally would       
   increase the X coordinate by 8.  A size 2 character plotted  
   vertically would increase the Y coordinate by 16 (twice the  
   normal character width).                                     
                                                                
   Backward plotting is selected by ESC M (1B 4D hex).  This    
   causes the character size along the current axis to be       
   subtracted from the current axis coordinate.  Note that the  
   order of the pixels of the character on the display is not   
   changed: only the positioning on the axis is affected.       
                                                                
   Horizontal plotting is selected by the ESC J (1B 4A)         
   sequence.  This is the normal state and the default when     
   the resident starts.                                         
                                                                
   Vertical plotting is selected by ESC K (1B 4B).  This causes 
   characters to be plotted either up (if forwards writing is   
   selected) or down (if backwards writing is selected) the     
   screen.                                                      
                                                                
   When the vertical axis is selected for plotting, characters  
   are rotated counterclockwise by 90 degrees.                  
                                                                
   If the vertical screen resolution of the terminal is less    
   than the horizontal, vertical writing will not work well     
   because the characters will not be a full eight dots wide.   
                                                                
 3.2.3.1.2.4.4  Text positioning commands                       
                                                                
   Text positioning commands are either ASCII control codes or  
   two-character escape sequences.  They change the screen      
   position depending on the state of:                          
                                                                
        * the current axis (horizontal/vertical)                
        * the current direction (forwards/backwards)            
        * the current text size (normal or bold)                
                                                                
   None of these functions is destructive (i.e., performing a   
   backspace will not destroy the character backed up to).      
   If screen wraparound occurs (if a coordinate becomes greater 
   than 511 or less than 0) the coordinate is truncated to      
   nine bits.  512 would thus become 0 and -1 would become 511. 
                                                                
   The table below gives all the possible combinations of the   
   axis, direction and character size.                          
                                                                
   Backspace (BS, 08 hex)                                       
                                                                
     This causes the terminal to back up one character width    
     along the current axis.  'Backing up' when in backwards    
     writing means going forward.                               
                                                                
   Tab (TAB, 09 hex)                                            
                                                                
     This causes the terminal to advance one character width    
     along the current axis.  This function is like plotting    
     an empty character.                                        
                                                                
   Line Feed (LF, 0A hex)                                       
                                                                
     This function decreases the display position by one        
     character height perpendicular to the current axis (i.e.,  
     goes to the next line.)  On the horizontal axis this moves 
     down one line.  On the vertical axis this moves right one  
     character height.                                          
                                                                
   Vertical Tab (VT, 0B hex)                                    
                                                                
     This function advances the display line position by one    
     character height perpendicular to the current axis (i.e.,  
     goes to the previous line).                                
                                                                
   Form Feed (FF, 0C hex)                                       
                                                                
     This function sets the screen position to the first        
     character on the top line of the display.  The screen is   
     not erased.                                                
                                                                
   Erase Screen (ESC FF, 1B 0C hex)                             
                                                                
     This erases the screen.  The (X,Y) position should not     
     be changed.  When the screen is erased all dots must       
     be turned 'off' in monochrome or set to the background     
     color in color.  The palette should be reset if the        
     underlying color hardware is palette-based (see section    
     3.2.3.1.8).                                                
                                                                
   Carriage Return (CR, 0D hex)                                 
                                                                
     This goes to the next line and sets the position along the 
     current axis to the current margin.                        
                                                                
   Superscript (ESC @, 1B 40)                                   
                                                                
     This increases the the screen position along the           
     perpendicular axis by five pixels.                         
                                                                
   Subscript (ESC A, 1B 41 hex)                                 
                                                                
     This decreases the screen position along the perpendicular 
     axis by five pixels.                                       
                                                                
   Set Margin (ESC Z, 1B 5A hex)                                
                                                                
     This command sets the margin used with the CR control      
     code.  The margin  is set to the current X coordinate if   
     horizontal writing is selected, and the current Y          
     coordinate if vertical writing is selected.   
             
  */ eject                                                     
  The following table is a summary of the actions of the       
  control codes.                                               
                                                               
            PLATO DISPLAY CONTROL FUNCTIONS                    
                                                               
                                                               
  ASCII  FUNCTION           SIZE 0             SIZE 2          
  CODE             HORIZONTAL  VERTICAL   HORIZONTAL  VERTICAL 
                    FWD  BKW   FWD  BKW   FWD  BKW    FWD  BKW 
                                                               
  BS    Backspace   X-8  X+8   Y-8  Y+8   X-16 X+16  Y-16 Y+16 
  HT    Tab         X+8  X-8   Y+8  Y-8   X+16 X-16  Y+16 Y-16 
  LF    Line Feed   Y-16 Y-16  X+16 X+16  Y-32 Y-32  X+32 X+32 
  VT    Vert. Tab   Y+16 Y+16  X-16 X-16  Y+32 Y+32  X-32 X-32 
  FF    Form Feed   X=0 X=504  Y=0 Y=504  X=0 X=496  Y=0 Y=496 
                    Y=496 Y=496 X=15 X=15 Y=480Y=480 X=31 X=31 
  CR    Carriage    X=MARGIN   Y=MARGIN   X=MARGIN   Y=MARGIN  
        Return      Y-16 Y-16  X+16 X+16  Y-32 Y-32  X+32 X+32 
  ESC @ SUPER       Y+5  Y+5   X-5  X-5   Y+10 Y+10  X-10 X-10 
  ESC A SUB       Y-5  Y-5   X+5  X+5   Y-10 Y-10  X+10 X+10   
  Normal character  X+8  X-8   Y+8  Y-8   X+16 X-16  Y+16 Y-16 
                                                               
                                                               
  Note:     Operations on X and Y coordinates are modulo 512.  

 3.2.3.1.2.5  Block mode                                        
                                                                
   Block mode is selected with EM (19 hex).  In block mode      
   (also known as mode 4) the host sends down pairs of screen   
   coordinates which indicate opposite end points of a          
   rectangular area on the screen to be drawn.  In monochrome   
   mode write and mode rewrite cause all dots inclusive of the  
   specified area to be turned on; modes erase and inverse      
   cause the area to be turned off (erased).  In color, modes   
   write and rewrite cause the area to be set to the foreground 
   color while modes erase and inverse set it to the background 
   color.                                                       
                                                                
   Once in block mode, subsequent pairs of coordinates indicate 
   areas to be drawn.  The coordinate pairs are each one to     
   four bytes in the format specified in section 3.1.2.4.3.     
   No assumptions should be made on the order of the            
   coordinates received (i.e., the upper left hand corner of    
   the rectangle is not always sent first).                     
                                                                
   The current (X,Y) position after each block is drawn should  
   be set to the first coordinate pair (call it (X1,Y1)) minus  
   15 dots in the vertical direction (that is, (X1,Y1-15)).     
                                                                
 3.2.3.1.2.6  User program mode                                 
                                                                
   The user program mode is used to communicate with "user      
   programs."  The main such user program is the Micro PLATO    
   interpreter.  When the resident receives data from the host  
   in this mode it should call the routine whose address is     
   stored in the memory location for this user mode.  The       
   addresses for these routines are kept in the Micro PLATO     
   variables MOD5A, MOD6A and MOD7A.  If the interface to Micro 
   PLATO is not implemented, data in this mode should be        
   ignored.                                                     
                                                                
   Mode five is selected by ESC T (1B 54 hex), mode six by ESC  
   U (1B 55 hex) and mode 7 by ESC V (1B 56 hex).  The host     
   sends data in word format in this mode (see section          
   3.1.2.4.2 for a description of word format).  The entire     
   eighteen bits of the word are passed to the user program.    
                                                                
   If the address stored in MODx is zero, then this data should 
   be ignored and the resident should simplyreturn.             
                                                                
   If the user program address is non-zero, it is a pointer     
   to the routine to be called.  The data is passed to the user 
   program in the C, D and E registers on the Z80.  Bits 1      
   through 8 are passed in E, 9 through 16 in D and 17 through  
   18 in the lowest two bits of C.  See appendix C for the      
   equivalent registers on other microprocessors.               
                                                                
 3.2.3.1.3  Load coordinate command                             
                                                                
   This command loads the current (X,Y) coordinates from the    
   coordinate received from the PLATO host.  The escape         
   sequence ESC 2 (1B 32 hex) requires one to four bytes as its 
   argument (in the format specified for coordinates in section 
   3.1.2.4.3).                                                  
                                                                
   The current (X,Y) coordinates are used to position text,     
   reset line coordinates, etc.  

 3.2.3.1.4  Echo command 
                                                    
   The Echo command asks the terminal for information or       
   requests a function.  This command is used to query the     
   terminal for its type, subtype, load file, configuration,   
   terminal ID and memory contents.  Seven bits of data        
   (encoded in a three-byte response whose format is detailed  
   in section 3.2.3.3.2) are sent up to the host.  The Echo    
   command is also used to sound the terminal's alarm.         
                                                               
   The Echo command consists of the escape sequence ESC Y      
   followed by three bytes in word format (see section         
   3.1.2.4.2).  The low seven bits of the word indicate the    
   echo code.  The valid echo codes are listed below.  If an   
   echo code is received that is not one of those specified    
   here, an echo response must be generated with that seven bit
   code in it.                                                 
                                                               
   Many of the echo codes are taken from variables used to     
   communicate with Micro PLATO.  The variable will be named   
   here if this is the case.  All such variables are described 
   in section 4.3.                                             
                                                               
 3.2.3.1.4.1  Terminal type                                    
                                                               
   Echo code 70 hex: Terminal type.  This is 12 decimal for all
   ASCII terminals.  This is the Micro PLATO variable M.TYPE.  
   The resident must set this variable at initialization time. 

 3.2.3.1.4.2  Terminal subtype                                  
                                                                
   Echo code 71 hex: Terminal subtype.  A different subtype is  
   assigned to each kind of machine.  The following is a list   
   of current subtypes:                                         
                                                                
     0: Control Data IST II                                     
     1: Control Data IST III                                    
     2: Control Data 721-30 (Viking)                            
     3: Control Data IST I                                      
     4: IBM PC                                                  
     5: Zenith Z100                                             
     6: Apple II                                                
     7: Scrolling terminal (dumb TTY)                           
     8: Dataspeed 40                                            
     9: VT 100 or ANSI X 3.64 compatible terminal               
    10: Unused                                                  
    11: CDC 750                                                 
    12: Tektronix 401x                                          
    13: TI 99/4a                                                
    14: Atari                                                   
                                                                
   As a general rule of thumb, if there is no subtype assigned  
   to a particular machine the closest machine type should be   
   used until one is assigned.                                  
                                                                
   The PLATO host will send not send certain commands to        
   terminal which cannot process them.  For example, only       
   terminals which can handle color will be sent color          
   commands.                                                    
                                                                
   During terminal resident initialization, the Micro PLATO     
   variable M.SBTYPE should also be set to this value.         
                                                               
 3.2.3.1.4.3  Resident load file                               
                                                               
   Echo code 72 hex: Terminal resident load file.  This is only
   applicable to Control Data terminals whose residents are    
   loaded from the PLATO host.  The standard load files are    
   given below:                                                
                                                               
     0: ASCII/Graphics resident (IST III)                      
     1: Short ASCII resident (IST II and III)                  
     2: Reserved                                               
     3: IST I ASCII resident                                   
     4: Reserved                                               
     5: Reserved                                               
     6: Reserved                                               
     7: Reserved                                               
     8: Viking 721-30 resident                                 
     9: Reserved                                               
                                                               
   Other terminals should return 0 as their load file.  The    
   Micro PLATO variable M.LDFILE is also set to this value.    
                                                               
 3.2.3.1.4.4  Terminal configuration                           
                                                               
   Echo code 73 hex: Terminal configuration.  This indicates   
   the presence or absence of certain terminal features.       
   Currently only two bits are defined:                        
                                                               
     Bits 1 - bit 5: undefined (should be 0)                   
     Bit 6: = 0, 16K memory; = 1, 32K memory                   
            (only applicable to CDC ISTs,                      
            should be 0 for non-CDC                            
            terminals.)                                        
     Bit 7: = 0, no touch panel; = 1, touch                    
            panel (or other device) present                    
                                                               
   The Micro PLATO variable M.CONFIG is also set to this value.
                                                               
 3.2.3.1.4.5  Send backout code                                
                                                               
   Echo code 7A hex: Send a backout code to PLATO host and turn
   turn off the Data Terminal Ready (DTR) signal.  This is for 
   disconnecting with the host.                                
                                                               
   The backout code is sent to the host as an unsolicited      
   status word of FF hex (the ten-bit PLATO key is 3FF hex).   
                                                               
 3.2.3.1.4.6  Sound alarm                                      
                                                               
   Echo code 7B hex: Sound audible alarm at the terminal.      
   Nothing should be sent back to the host.                    
                                                               
 3.2.3.1.4.7  Return terminal ID code                          
                                                               
   Echo code 7C hex: Return 16-bit terminal ID code. (See      
   section 3.2.3.3.2.)  Only CDC terminals need respond to     
   this.  Others may ignore this code and return a normal echo 
   response.   
                                                
 3.2.3.1.4.8  Read memory                                       
                                                                
   Echo code 7D hex: Return the 7 least significant bits of the 
   contents of the memory location specified by a preceding     
   Load memory address command.  Non-CDC terminals may ignore   
   this echo code and echo a normal response.                   
                                                                
 3.2.3.1.4.9  Turn on flow control                              
                                                                
   Echo code 52 hex: turn on flow control.  When this echo code 
   is received by a terminal that can handle flow control, the  
   resident should turn on flow control in the host             
   communications port.  The keyboard mapping must be switched  
   to the flow control mapping.  The terminal must also return  
   a reply of 53 hex to the host to indicate that flow control  
   has been turned on.                                          
                                                                
   If a terminal cannot handle flow control, it should return   
   a reply of 52 hex.  It should not activate XON/XOFF flow     
   control and it should retain the original PLATO ASCII        
   keymapping.  The easiest thing to do is to let this case     
   fall into the default case of replying to the echo code with 
   the echo code if flow control has not been implemented.      
                                                                
 3.2.3.1.5  Load memory address command                         
                                                                
   The load memory address command consists of the escape       
   sequence ESC W and three bytes formatted as word data (see   
   section 3.1.2.4.2).  The lower sixteen bits of the word      
   form the absolute memory address where data should be        
   written.  The resident must maintain a variable with the     
   current memory address, which is used by other commands and  
   modes.                                                     
                                                              
   As described in section 3.2.3.1.2.3, Load memory mode,     
   this is used to set the addresses for loading character    
   sets.  Non-CDC terminals should interpret these addresses  
   as indices into a byte array for the programmable character
   set, offset by 3800 hex.                                   
                                                              
 3.2.3.1.6  SSF command                                       
                                                              
   The SSF (Select Special Function) command is used by the   
   PLATO host to communicate with special devices attached    
   to the terminal.  The command consists of the sequence     
   ESC Q (1B 51 hex) followed by three bytes formatted as a   
   word (see section 3.1.2.4.2).  Only the lower fifteen      
   bits of the word are used.                                 
                                                              
   Bits 15 through 11 are the device address.  These must be  
   examined to determine what kind of SSF command this is.    
                                                              
 3.2.3.1.6.1  Select slide projector                          
                                                              
   This SSF command was used to control the operation of the  
   image projector on an obsolete plasma terminal and is not  
   used on modern terminals.  It should therefore be          
   discarded.                                                 
                                                              
       bit    15 14 13 12 11 10  9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1    
               0  0  0  0  0  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X                 
                                                               
   Note that the device address bits (15 to 11) are 00000.     
                                                               
 3.2.3.1.6.2  Set interrupt mask                               
                                                               
   This SSF command controls the interrupt mask.  Its primary  
   use is to enable and disable the touch panel, but it also   
   controls the interrupt of the serial channel.  Device       
   address bits are 00001, and bits 1 thru 8 are the terminal  
   interrupt mask.  If a bit position is a one, the            
   corresponding device is enabled.  If the bit is a zero, that
   device is disabled.  Currently only two devices are         
   controlled with this: the touch panel (or replacement       
   device) and the serial channels.                            
                                                               
       bit    15 14 13 12 11 10  9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1     
               0  0  0  0  1  X  X  <---INTERRUPT MASK--->     
                                                               
              bit 1 = not used                                 
              bit 2 = not used                                 
              bit 3 = not used                                 
              bit 4 = serial channels                          
              bit 5 = always 1                                 
              bit 6 = touch panel                              
              bit 7 = always 1                                 
              bit 8 = always 1                                 
 3.2.3.1.6.3  Select input/output                              
                                                               
   This instruction selects a device address for further       
   transfers with the EXT command (see section 3.2.3.1.7).  In 
   addition, it may be used to transfer one eight-bit data byte
   to the device.  The bit definitions are as follows:         
                                                               
       bit    15 14 13 12 11 10  9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1     
               A  A  A  A  A  W  I  D  D  D  D  D  D  D  D     
                                                               
   Bits 15 to 11   Address -- Selects the device that is to    
                   communicate with the terminal. Device       
                   address must be two or greater.             
                                                               
   Bit 10          Read/Write -- If bit 10 is one, data is     
                   read from the device and sent upline to the 
                   host according to the format in section     
                   3.2.3.3, IF bit 9 is zero.                  
                   If bit 10 is zero, data in bits 1 through 8 
                   are sent to the device, IF bit 9 is zero.   
                                                               
   Bit 09          Inhibit -- When this bit is one, all        
                   data transfers are inhibited.  This is used 
                   to set a device address for subsequent EXT  
                   commands without performing any data        
                   transfer.  When this bit is zero the        
                   transfer indicated by bit 10 takes place.   
                                                               
   Bits 08 to 01   Data -- This data is transferred to the     
                   device if both bits 09 and 10 are zero.     
                                                               
   The resident should retain the input and output device   
   addresses separately.  The addresses may be used by          
   subsequent EXT commands.                                     
                                                                
   Device addresses 00 and 01 are reserved for the 'Slide       
   Projector' and 'Set Interrupt Mask' formats of the SSF       
   instruction.                                                 
                                                                
   Device addresses 02 and 03  are used to transfer data and    
   control to serial port devices.  Writing to address 02 will  
   transfer a byte of data to the currently selected serial     
   device, reading from address 02 will transfer a byte from    
   the device.  Writing to address 03 will set up control       
   information for the selected serial device.  The codes used  
   for control are specified in appendix F.  Reading from       
   address 03 will give the current status, also defined in     
   appendix F.                                                  
                                                                
   Device address 04 is used to select a specific serial port   
   for terminals with multiple serial ports.  Writing to device 
   04 selects the device.  Reading from address 04 should       
   return the currently selected device number.  The mapping of 
   these logical devices to physical devices is up to the       
   implementor, but the following conventions have been         
   established:                                                 
                                                                
        Port 0: the default serial device.                      
        Port 1: other serial device.                            
        Port 2: other serial device.                            
        Port 3: other serial device.                            
        Port 4: other serial device.                            
        Port 5: other serial device.                            
        Port 6: other serial device.                            
        Port 7: Internal modem on Viking 721-30                 
        Port 8: System printer.                                 
        Port 9: Communications channel to the PLATO host.       
                                                                
   Device 05 is not used.                                       
                                                                
   Addresses 06 through 31 (decimal) are devices on the         
   parallel channel of the CDC terminals.                       
                                                                
 3.2.3.1.7  EXT (External Data) command                         
                                                                
   This command transfers two 8-bit bytes to the external       
   device selected by the previous SSF command.                 
                                                                
   The EXT command consists of the sequence ESC R (1B 52 hex)   
   followed by three bytes in word format (see section          
   3.1.2.4.2).  The lower sixteen bits of the word are used:    
   first, bits 9 through 16 are transferred to the selected     
   device as one byte; then bits 1 through 8 are transferred.   
                                                                
 3.2.3.1.8  Color commands                                      
                                                                
   There are two commands for selecting color: ESC a (1B 61     
   hex) sets the foreground color.  ESC b (1B 62) sets the      
   background color.  Color values are 24 bits in length, 8     
   bits of intensity for each of the colors red, green and      
   blue, in the following format:                                                      
                                                               
        bits  24 through 17    16 through 9    8 through 1     
              <----red---->    <--green--->    <--blue--->     
                                                               
   These 24 bits are placed in the four bytes following the    
   first two bytes of the command accordingly:                 
                                                               
                     b8 b7 b6 b5 b4 b3 b2 b1                   
        Byte 1:       P  1 <-bits 01 to 06->                   
        Byte 2:       P  1 <-bits 07 to 12->                   
        Byte 3:       P  1 <-bits 13 to 18->                   
        Byte 4:       P  1 <-bits 19 to 24->                   
                                                               
   Notes: Bit 8 (P) is the parity bit (even) and bit 7 is      
   always 1 to avoid sending control codes.                    
                                                               
   The PLATO software can specify any color in this range,     
   but eight colors have predefined values in the PLATO Author 
   Language.  These are:                                       
                                                               
        Color        Hex value                                 
                                                               
        black        000000                                    
        blue         0000FF                                    
        green        00FF00                                    
        cyan         00FFFF                                    
        red          FF0000                                    
        magenta      FF00FF                                    
        yellow       FFFF00                                    
        white        FFFFFF    
                                
   If a color is received and is not available on a particular  
   machine, the closest possible match should be used.          
                                                                
   Many display devices use a palette scheme to select colors.  
   The resident must then keep track of which colors are        
   selected.  When a new color is received, the next free slot  
   in the palette should be assigned to this color (if a color  
   is not available, the closest match should be used).         
   Subsequent settings to this color will cause no additions to 
   the table.  The color will simply be reused.  When the       
   palette table becomes full, further color commands should    
   be ignored.                                                  
                                                                
   Whenever the screen is erased, the palette table should      
   be emptied and the current background and foreground colors  
   placed in the table.                                         
                                                                
 3.2.3.1.9  Paint command                                       
                                                                
   The paint command is used to fill an arbitrary area with     
   a certain color or character pattern.  The escape sequence   
   for the paint command is ESC c (1B 63), which is followed by 
   two bytes which contain a nine-bit value formatted in this   
   way:                                                         
                                                                
        bits         b9 b8 b7 b6 b5 b4 b3 b2 b1                 
                      M  M  C  C  C  C  C  C  C                 
                                                                
        Bits 8 to 9: The character set memory used for          
                     the character.  00 is M0, 01 is M1, etc.   
        Bits 1 to 7: An index into the character set memory    
                     specified in bits 8 and 9.                
                                                               
   This information is placed in the data bytes following the  
   escape sequence this way:                                   
                                                               
                     b8 b7 b6 b5 b4 b3 b2 b1                   
        Byte 1        P  1 <--bits 1 to 6-->                   
        Byte 2        P  1  0  0  0 <7 to 9>                   
                                                               
   Note: b8 is the parity bit.                                 
                                                               
                                                               
   If the value of the character is zero, then a solid paint is
   done over the entire area.  The paint begins at the current 
   (X,Y) position (set perhaps by a load coordinate command).  
   Pixels surrounding the start location are set to the        
   foreground color until a pixel set to the background color  
   or the edge of the screen is reached.                       
                                                               
   When filling with a character the character pattern is      
   repeated throughout the same area that a solid fill would   
   have covered.  For reasons of speed, the characters should  
   be aligned on byte boundaries in the filled area.  The      
   character is written into memory in mode write.             
                                                               
   Since the paint operation can take a very long time,        
   there must be a check in it for the user aborting it.  A    
   check should be made for the STOP or the shift-STOP keys in 
   the outer loop of the paint.  Other keys should be processed
   as normal (sent to the host or buffered for Micro PLATO as   
   required).  The STOP or SHIFT-STOP key must also be sent if  
   pressed during a paint.                                      
                                                                
 3.2.3.1.10  Resident mode change commands                      
                                                                
   The PLATO, TTY and 'graphics' modes of resident operation    
   are selected by three escape sequences.  ESC STX (1B 02 hex) 
   selects PLATO operation.  The host will always send this     
   command to the terminal at the beginning of the session.     
                                                                
   ESC ETX (1B 03 hex) selects the TTY mode of operation.  At   
   the end of the PLATO session the host will send this         
   sequence to the terminal to reset to TTY.                    
                                                                
   When the resident enters TTY mode it must turn off flow      
   control and revert to the original PLATO keyboard mapping    
   (i.e., cancel the effects of the flow control echo code)     
   if it has been turned on.                                    
                                                                
   ESC SOH (1B 01 hex) is used to select the 'graphics' mode    
   in the Viking 721-30 and IST III graphics residents.  In     
   this mode the terminal emulates a Tektronix 401x graphics    
   terminal.  Other machines should treat this as a command     
   to enter TTY mode.
                                           
 3.2.3.3  Upline data formats                                   
                                                                
   The PLATO resident sends a number of different types of data 
   to the host.  Besides keys the user presses, the resident    
   sends echo responses, touch input, external device data and  
   unsolicited status.  All upline data are referred to as      
   'keys.'                                                      
                                                                
   The PLATO host considers keys to be ten bits in length: the  
   bottom eight bits are the data and the upper two bits are an 
   identifier.  Since only seven bits of data can be sent to    
   the host at a time, two formats are used for transmitting    
   keys upline.  The majority of keys are typed by the user, so 
   these keys are sent as single characters to the host, while  
   the non-keyboard, ten-bit data types are sent in             
   three-character escape sequences.  The general format for    
   these sequences is:                                          
                                                                
        bit          10  9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1              
                      I  I  D  D  D  D  D  D  D  D              
                                                                
   Bits 10 and 9     Identifier for this key type.  The values  
                     for these bits are:                        
                                                                
                     0  0: Echo response                        
                     0  1: Touch panel data                     
                     1  0: External data                        
                     1  1: Unsolicited status                   
                                                                
   Bits 8 to 1       Data for this key.                         
                                                                
   These ten bits are formatted into the three characters      
   sent to the PLATO host in the sequence ESC c1 c2, where     
   c1 and c2 are:                                              
                                                               
        First character after ESC (c1):                        
                                                               
             b8  b7  b6  b5  b4  b3  b2  b1                    
              P   1  <----bits 6 to 1----->                    
                                                               
        Second character after ESC (c2)                        
                                                               
             b8  b7  b6  b5  b4  b3  b2  b1                    
              P   1   1   0  <---10 to 7-->                    
                                                               
   All characters sent upline must have even parity.  Parity   
   may be generated by hardware or by software (in which case  
   the hardware would be set up to transmit 8 bits with no     
   parity).  The PLATO host will discard any data received     
   with bad parity.                                            
                                                               
 3.2.3.3.1  Keyboard data                                      
                                                               
   When the user presses a key on the keyboard, the code must  
   be sent to the host, translated into the correct PLATO      
   keycode according to one of the two tables in Appendix D.   
   Note that there are two mappings for the PLATO keys.  The   
   first, known as the 'original PLATO ASCII keymapping,' is   
   used when flow control has not been turned on or with       
   terminals that do not support flow control.  The second,    
   known as the 'flow control keymapping,' is used when the    
    terminal has received the echo code to turn flow control on.
                                                               
   Two different keymappings are required because of an        
   unfortunate choice of characters in the original implemen-  
   tation of the PLATO keymapping.  Shift-STOP and SUPER were  
   made DC1 and DC3, which are the XON and XOFF characters.    
   To use standard flow-control protocols the codes for these  
   keys had to be changed.                                     
                                                               
   Some keyboards have keys that are represented by a single   
   character in the ASCII character set, but by a two-character
   sequence in the PLATO character set.  The two characters    
   are ACCESS (also known as SHIFT-SQUARE, a PLATO key for     
   generating these and other special characters) and another  
   character as specified in the following table.              
                                                               
        Character    Hex value       Resulting sequence        
                      (ASCII)                                  
                                                               
             #         23            ACCESS $                  
             &         26            ACCESS +                  
             @         40            ACCESS 5                  
             \         5C            ACCESS /                  
             ^         5E            ACCESS x                  
             `         60            ACCESS q                  
             {         7B            ACCESS [                  
             |         7C            ACCESS I                  
             }         7D            ACCESS ]                  
             ~         7E            ACCESS n                  
    Note that some of these characters (^, `, and ~) are         
   auto-backspacing, auto-raising diacritics on PLATO.  When    
   typed, they will adjust themselves over the previous         
   character in a single keypress (,  and , for example).    
   This is a function of the PLATO system and nothing further   
   is required in the terminal resident to support this.        
                                                                
 3.2.3.3.2  Echo responses                                      
                                                                
   When an echo command is received (see section 3.2.3.1.4)     
   the terminal will in most cases send back an echo response   
   to the host.  The logical ten-bit key is formatted as        
   follows:                                                     
                                                                
        bit    b10  b9  b8  b7  b6  b5  b4  b3  b2  b1          
                 0   0   1  <--seven bit response---->          
                                                                
   The ID code echo requires a four-byte response, which is     
   formatted as follows (note: only CDC terminals send this):   
                                                                
                           b8  b7  b6  b5  b4  b3  b2  b1       
        First byte          P   0   0   0   ID bits 04-01       
        Second byte         P   0   0   1   ID bits 08-05       
        Third byte          P   0   1   0   ID bits 10-09       
        Fourth byte         P   0   1   1   ID bits 16-13       
                                                                
   The 16-bit terminal ID code is transmitted to the PLATO host 
   in 4-bit segments, with the least significant bits sent      
   first, (bits 01-04 of the first word). Bits 06 and 05 of the 
   output word identify which 4 bits of the ID code are         
   contained in the output word. Bit 7 is always 0.             
                                                                
 3.2.3.3.3  Touch panel data                                    
                                                                
   The touch panel has a resolution of 16 by 16.  Thus, a       
   touch key can fit into eight bits.  Its ten-bit form is:     
                                                                
                                                                
   Touch Panel       b10  b9  b8  b7  b6  b5  b4  b3  b2  b1    
    Output Word       0    1  <--X coord--->  <--Y coord--->    
                                                                
   The lower left hand corner of the screen is at location      
   (0,0) while the upper right hand corner is at (15,15).       
   Alternate input devices that have greater precision must     
   be scaled down to fit into the 0 to 15 range.                
                                                                
   The touch panel should be active only when enabled by an     
   SSF command (see section 3.2.3.1.6.2).                       
                                                                
 3.2.3.3.4  External data                                       
                                                                
   There are two cases where EXT data is sent to the host: 1)   
   When an SSF command is received with bit 10=1, which         
   requests an input from a device connected to the terminal.   
   2) If interrupts are enabled for the external devices and    
   such a device interrupts.  In either case, one byte of data  
   should be read from the designated device and sent to the    
   host in a ten-bit key which is formatted in this way:        
                                                                
   External Data     b10  b9  b8  b7  b6  b5  b4  b3  b2  b1    
     Output Word       1    0  <-------EXTERNAL DATA-------->    
                                                                
 3.2.3.3.5  Unsolicited status                                  
                                                                
   The unsolicited status word is transmitted to the PLATO host 
   as a result of some event occurring at the terminal.         
                                                                
   The following status codes describe bits 01 to 07 of the     
   unsolicited status word. The description describes the event 
   that initiated the sending of the unsolicited status to the  
   PLATO host.                                                  
                                                                
        Status Code          Description                        
             00              Unassigned                         
             01              Unassigned                         
             02              Terminal Master Reset              
             03              Unassigned                         
             04              Unassigned                         
             05              Mode 2 Block error (not used)      
             06 to 3F        Unassigned                         
             40 to 7E        Reserved for use by PCN loader     
             7F              PLATO Backout Code                 
                                                                
   The status byte is placed in the ten-bit key as follows:     
                                                                
   Unsolicited Status  b10  b9  b8  b7  b6  b5  b4  b3  b2  b1  
    Output Word          1   1   1  <------STATUS CODE------->  
                                                                
 3.2.3.4  Redirecting I/O                                       
                                                                
   When the interface to Micro PLATO is implemented in the      
   resident, input from the keyboard, touch panel and external  
   devices must be redirected to Micro PLATO rather than sent   
   to the host if Micro PLATO has requested this.               
                                                                
   The variable M.KSW is set by the Micro PLATO interpreter     
   if this input data is to be redirected to Micro PLATO.       
                                                                
   When input is generated the contents of M.KSW must be        
   examined, and if required the data must be placed in the     
   buffer for Micro PLATO instead of sent to the host.          
                                                                
   Interrupts from external devices (such as serial ports) must 
   also check the M.EXTPA (external processor) address to       
   determine whether Micro PLATO is requesting to handle the    
   interrupt.  If M.EXTPA is zero, a data byte is read in from  
   the interrupting device and is sent as an external key       
   (see section 3.2.3.3.4 for the description of this).  If     
   the processor address is non-zero, this address should be    
   called so that Micro PLATO can handle the interrupt.         
   Note that M.EXTPA can be zero and M.KSW can indicate that    
   the key go to Micro PLATO.                                   
                                                                
 3.3  Exception handling                                        
                                                                
   Certain error conditions require special handling to restore 
   the resident to a 'good' state.  This section describes      
   these conditions and the actions that should be taken. 
      
 3.3.1  Loss of carrier                                        
                                                               
   If the carrier is lost on the line to the host, the resident
   should go into TTY mode and notify the user of this.  The   
   resident should not stay in PLATO mode because it will      
   frequently not be in text mode, and any messages sent by    
   the supporting network would not be visible.                
                                                               
   There should be a timeout on the carrier of approximately   
   1.5 seconds.  If carrier has not been detected for this     
   time, the resident should revert to TTY mode.               
                                                               
   This check should not be made when Micro PLATO is being     
   executed.                                                   
                                                               
 3.3.2  Buffer overflow                                        
                                                               
   At a minimum, the resident must be able to plot all output  
   received at 1200 BPS without overflowing its input buffer.  
   If overflow occurs, the resident must be able to recover    
   and continue to function.                                   
                                                               
   If a terminal is intended to run at communications rates    
   higher than it can plot text and graphics, the flow control 
   protocol should be implemented. 
                            
  3.3.3  Host crash                                             
                                                               
   If the PLATO host crashes without dropping carrier, there   
   should be a way for the user to escape from PLATO mode, for 
   the same reasons the resident should revert to TTY mode when
   the carrier is lost.  On the IST III terminal this is       
   accomplished by a pressing the reset button on the terminal 
   for three seconds.  On the Viking 721-30 pressing the keys  
   Control-Shift-MREL performs this function.                  
                                                               
 3.4  Programming guidelines                                   
                                                               
   The terminal resident can be a multipurpose program.  It    
   can communicate solely with the PLATO host over the         
   communications line, or it can load a Micro PLATO           
   interpreter and execute Micro PLATO lessons, or it can do   
   both simultaneously, facilitating communications between the
   host system and Micro PLATO lessons.                        
                                                               
   Currently Micro PLATO interpreters exist for the Z80 and    
   8086 families of microprocessors.  Residents for machines   
   of this class should be structured such that the low level  
   routines can be called by the routines that handle          
   communications with the host, as well as the entry points   
   listed in section 4 of this document (the interface to Micro
   PLATO).                                                     
                                                               
   There are a number of factors dealing with the way output   
   from the host is transmitted that dictate how the resident  
   should be written.  For example, it is very common on PLATO 
   for output to be aborted.  This means that at any point in  
   time an escape sequence or the data for a command could be  
   truncated and another control character or escape sequence   
   sent.  Users abort output frequently when they press keys    
   before the host is finished sending a page.                  
                                                                
   To avoid misinterpretation, the resident should be driven by 
   the data, rather than waiting for each individual component  
   of it.  Each character from the host should be processed in  
   the following manner:                                        
                                                                
        IF the previous character was ESC THEN                  
             Perform the action required for this escape        
             sequence.  This might involve setting a new data   
             processing mode, or initiating a command that will 
             wait for a single unit of data and then go back to 
             the current data processing mode, or a simple      
             command to set the screen mode.                    
             Note that it is possible to receive the sequence   
             ESC ESC (if output is aborted).  This must be      
             treated identically to receiving a single ESC.     
        ELSE IF this character is a control character THEN      
             Perform the action required for this control       
             character.  As above, this might select a new      
             mode or cause simple repositioning of the current  
             (X,Y) location (such as CR).                       
             When ESC is received it must be remembered so      
             the first test above can be performed.             
        ELSE IF a command is in progress THEN                   
             handle this byte appropriately.  Commands that     
             fall into this category include load coordinate,   
             set memory address, SSF commands, etc.             
        ELSE                                                    
             Give this data to the appropriate routine handling 
             the current mode (text, point, line, etc.)         
        ENDIF                                                   
                                                                
   Since so much of the data follows the same format (most      
   commands and modes expect data in word or coordinate format) 
   it is useful to write these two routines once.  The argument 
   to such a get_coordinate routine would be the character      
   received from the host; the output would be an indication    
   of whether the coordinate was completed and if so the        
   coordinate received.  One piece of information that all      
   routines need is the number of bytes received since the      
   last unit of data was completed.  This byte count should     
   be zeroed at the beginning of every command and setting of   
   data processing mode.  This is because output may be aborted 
   at any time and a command or data word interrupted before it 
   is completely sent.                                          
                                                                
 4  Resident-Micro PLATO interface                              
                                                                
   This section describes the interface between the resident    
   and Micro PLATO.  This is, of course, very hardware          
   specific.  The basic interface will be given in terms of the 
   Z80 implementation.  A mapping between this and other        
   processors is given in Appendix C.                           
                                                             
  4.1  General overview                                          
                                                                
   Micro PLATO does not send escape sequences to the resident   
   to perform terminal functions.  Rather, the interpreter      
   makes calls to the resident through a jump table (called the 
   "R." table) and communicates through a set of variables      
   (called the "M." variables).                                 
                                                                
   When performing services for Micro PLATO the resident should 
   use the M. variables for specifying the current screen mode, 
   text plotting direction, etc., instead of the variables used 
   for communicating with the host.  The resident should not    
   use the host variables (for current (X,Y) position, etc.)    
   when performing functions for Micro PLATO because the host   
   can be connected to the terminal at the same time Micro      
   PLATO is running, sending output to the resident             
   simultaneously with Micro PLATO.                             
                                                                
   The rules for loading the interpreter and the interface for  
   a particular processor are given in Appendix C.              
                                                                
 4.2  Callable routines                                         
                                                                
   Micro PLATO uses the following conventions when calling the  
   resident routines.                                           
                                                                
   1.   Entry is made via a 'call' instruction to a fixed       
        address in a jump table.  The offsets for this jump     
        table are dependant on the processor.  A table is given 
        for each microprocessor in Appendix C.                  
                                                                
   2.   All data is passed to the resident routines in the      
        following manner except where specified.               
                                                               
        a.   One variable -- passed in HL register pair.       
        b.   Two variables -- passed in HL and DE register as  
             listed for that routine.                          
        c.   Three or more variables -- variables stored in    
             memory, with HL = base address of variable string,
             and DE = length of variable string.               
                                                               
   3.   The resident may use and destroy any registers not     
        explicitly listed as safe in the Appendix for each     
        processor.                                             
                                                               
   4.   The user operating under modes 5, 6, or 7 will receive 
        host data from the resident in C, D and E registers as 
        shown in section 3.2.3.1.2.6.                          
                                                               
   5.   Micro PLATO will restore the stack pointer to its      
        original value when it exits.  It will otherwise only  
        push and pop data from it, as well as perform procedure
        calls.                                                 
                                                               
 4.2.1  R.INIT                                                 
                                                               
   Micro PLATO will jump to this entry point when it is        
   finished.  There should be no return.  The course to be     
   followed thereafter will depend on the implementation.      
   Terminals that are terminals only (CDC IST and Viking 721-30
   terminals) should put themselves in TTY mode.               
   Microcomputers emulating terminals may do likewise, or      
   return to the operating system, or return to a page of       
   options for the user to select what happens next.            
                                                                
 4.2.2  R.DOT                                                   
                                                                
   This is a point plot routine which will write or erase a     
   single dot on the display. The coordinates for the dot are   
   passed to the routine with X coordinate in HL register pair  
   and Y coordinate in DE register pair. The screen mode        
   is set in M.MODE prior to calling R.DOT.                     
                                                                
   At the completion of this routine, X and Y coordinates are   
   set to the coordinates passed to the routine in HL and DE    
   register pairs.                                              
                                                                
        Entry:       DE = Y coordinate                          
                     HL = X coordinate                          
                     Screen mode in M.MODE                      
                                                                
        Exit:        (X,Y) set to this coordinate.              
                                                                
 4.2.3  R.LINE                                                  
                                                                
   This routine will plot a line from the current (X,Y)         
   position on the display to the coordinates passed to the     
   routine.  The new X coordinate is passed in the HL register  
   pair and Y in the DE register pair.  The line is either      
   erased or written depending on the condition of the screen   
   mode in M.MODE.  At the completion of the routine the        
   current (X,Y) coordinate is updated to the coordinates       
    passed.                                                      
                                                                
        Entry:       DE = ending Y coordinate                   
                     HL = Ending X coordinate                   
                     Current (X,Y) set to starting coordinate   
                     Screen mode set in M.MODE                  
                                                                
        Exit:        (X,Y) set to the coordinates passed.       
                                                                
 4.2.4  R.CHARS                                                 
                                                                
   R.CHARS displays a string of six-bit PLATO character codes.  
   They are displayed in the screen mode specified in M.MODE,   
   with the plotting parameters specified by M.CCR.  The        
   address of the string is passed in the HL register pair.     
   The conversion of PLATO character codes to the ASCII codes   
   used in the resident is described in the next section.       
   Control characters are indicated by two character sequences, 
   the first of which is the 'uncover code.'  The value of the  
   uncover code is 3F hex.  Control codes are listed in section 
   4.2.4.2.                                                     
                                                                
   The end of the string can be indicated in two ways, both of  
   which use the uncover code followed by another byte.  3F 00  
   hex signifies the end of a normal string.  3F 01 hex         
   signifies the end of the string and indicates that the       
   uncover flag in M.MODE should be set.  This allows an        
   uncover code to be the last character in a string.  On the   
   next call to R.CHARS the uncover flag should be examined and 
   if set, the first character in the string should be treated  
   as control.                                                 
                                                               
   The following example illustrates the string required       
   to perform a line feed, display the word PLATO, and perform 
   a carriage return (assuming that M1 is the selected         
   character memory).                                          
                                                               
                 3F      Line                                  
                 0A        Feed                                
                 10      P                                     
                 0C      L                                     
                 01      A                                     
                 14      T                                     
                 0F      O                                     
                 3F      Carriage                              
                 0D        Return                              
                 3F      End of String                         
                 00        Code.                               
                                                               
                                                               
        Entry:                                                 
             HL points to string of characters terminated      
        by end of string control.                              
             M.MODE controls screen mode and holds the uncover 
        flag.                                                  
             M.CCR controls character size, etc.               
             (X,Y) set to location where string will be        
        plotted.                                               
                                                               
        Exit:                                                  
             (X,Y) updated to point after the last character.   
             The uncover flag in M.MODE is set if the last      
        code in the string was 3F 01, otherwise it is cleared.  
                                                                
 4.2.4.1  PLATO character code conversion                       
                                                                
   Micro PLATO has a different conception of the character      
   memories from the ASCII residents.  These originate          
   historically from the use of non-ASCII terminals with PLATO. 
   Most notably, Micro PLATO places all lower case alpha        
   characters in M0, while upper case alpha is in M1.  In the   
   resident all alpha characters are in M0.  R.CHARS must       
   translate these Micro PLATO codes into the ASCII characters  
   that can be plotted.  The character memory bits in M.CCR     
   indicate the Micro PLATO character memory to be used.  The   
   tables below give the equivalent ASCII memory and character  
   code.                                                        
                                                                
   Micro PLATO assumes that its M1 table follows directly after 
   M0, so it will on occasion index into M0 with values greater 
   than the number of characters in M0.  These should be        
   treated as indices into M1 (adjusted appropriately).         
                                                                                                                          
                                                              
 4.2.4.1.1  Micro PLATO M0                                    
                                                              
             Micro PLATO M0 character memory                  
                                                              
      Micro PLATO  Resident        Micro PLATO   Resident     
       hex  char  mem  hex          hex  char    mem hex      
        00   :     M0  3A            20   5      M0  35       
        01   a     M0  61            21   6      M0  36       
        02   b     M0  62            22   7      M0  37       
        03   c     M0  63            23   8      M0  38       
        04   d     M0  64            24   9      M0  39       
        05   e     M0  65            25   +      M0  2B       
        06   f     M0  66            26   -      M0  2D       
        07   g     M0  67            27   *      M0  2A       
        08   h     M0  68            28   /      M0  2F       
        09   i     M0  69            29   (      M0  28       
        0A   j     M0  6A            2A   )      M0  29       
        0B   k     M0  6B            2B   $      M0  24       
        0C   l     M0  6C            2C   =      M0  3D       
        0D   m     M0  6D            2D   SP     M0  20       
        0E   n     M0  6E            2E   ,      M0  2C       
        0F   o     M0  6F            2F   .      M0  2E       
        10   p     M0  70            30         M1  2F       
        11   q     M0  71            31   [      M0  5B       
        12   r     M0  72            32   ]      M0  5D       
        13   s     M0  73            33   %      M0  25       
        14   t     M0  74            34         M1  2A       
        15   u     M0  75            35              M1  24       
        16   v     M0  76            36   '      M0  27       
        17   w     M0  77            37   "      M0  22   
        18   x     M0  78            38   !      M0  21   
        19   y     M0  79            39   ;      M0  3B   
        1A   z     M0  7A            3A   <      M0  3C   
        1B   0     M0  30            3B   >      M0  3E   
        1C   1     M0  31            3C   _      M0  5F   
        1D   2     M0  32            3D   ?      M0  3F   
        1E   3     M0  33            3E        M1  3F   
        1F   4     M0  34            3F   uncover code    
 
 4.2.4.1.2  Micro PLATO M1                                
                                                          
             Micro PLATO M1 character memory              
                                                          
      Micro PLATO  Resident        Micro PLATO   Resident 
       hex  char  mem  hex          hex  char    mem hex  
        00   #     M0  23            20              M1  26   
        01   A     M0  41            21              M1  27   
        02   B     M0  42            22              M1  28   
        03   C     M0  43            23              M1  29   
        04   D     M0  44            24   ~      M0  7E   
        05   E     M0  45            25         M1  2B   
        06   F     M0  46            26         M1  2C   
        07   G     M0  47            27              M1  2D   
        08   H     M0  48            28              M1  2E   
        09   I     M0  49            29   {      M0  7B   
        0A   J     M0  4A            2A   }      M0  7D   
        0B   K     M0  4B            2B   &      M1  26   
        0C   L     M0  4C            2C         M1  25   
        0D   M     M0  4D            2D   SP     M1  20   
        0E   N     M0  4E            2E         M1  2A   
        0F   O     M0  4F            2F         M1  3D   
        10   P     M0  50            30              M1  22   
        11   Q     M0  51            31         M1  30   
        12   R     M0  52            32         M1  31   
        13   S     M0  53            33         M1  32   
        14   T     M0  54            34         M1  33   
        15   U     M0  55            35         M1  34   
        16   V     M0  56            36         M1  35   
        17   W     M0  57            37         M1  36         
        18   X     M0  58            38         M1  37         
        19   Y     M0  59            39         M1  38         
        1A   Z     M0  5A            3A         M1  39         
        1B   ~     M1  23            3B         M1  3A         
        1C   /     M1  21            3C         M1  3B         
        1D   ^     M0  5E            3D   @      M0  40         
        1E        M1  46            3E   \      M0  5C         
        1F   `     M0  60            3F   uncover code          
                                                                
 4.2.4.1.3  Micro PLATO M2 and M3                               
                                                                
   The alternate font character memories are indexed directly   
   by the Micro PLATO character code (this is where the         
   arrangement of the character memories originated).  The      
   Micro PLATO interpreter will assume that these two memories  
   are contiguous when referring to characters in the M3 memory 
   by indexing into the M2 memory with an out-of-range          
   character code, in the same way it treats M0 and M1 as       
   contiguous.                                                  
                                                                
 4.2.4.2  PLATO control code conversion                         
                                                                
   Control codes are formed by the uncover code followed by one 
   byte.  This byte is an ASCII control code or a value that    
   can be transformed into the second character of an escape    
   sequence from the host.  The control codes are listed below. 
                                                                
        Byte after                                              
         uncover       Purpose                                  
          00           End of string                          
          01           End of string, uncover flag set        
                                                              
          08           Backspace                              
          09           Tab                                    
          0A           Linefeed                               
          0B           Vertical tab                           
          0C           Form feed                              
          0D           Carriage return                        
                                                              
   (The previous codes are identical to the control codes sent
   by the host.  The following codes can be converted to the  
   second character of the escape sequence by adding 32 hex.) 
                                                              
          0E           Super                                  
          0F           Sub                                    
          10           Select M0                              
          11           Select M1                              
          12           Select M2                              
          13           Select M3                              
          14           Select M4                              
          15           Select M5                              
          16           Select M6                              
          17           Select M7                              
          18           Horizontal                             
          19           Vertical                               
          1A           Forward writing                        
          1B           Reverse writing                        
          1C           Select size 0 characters               
          1D           Select size 2 characters                
          3F           Uncover                                 
                                                               
   These functions are affected by the values stored in        
   the M. variables (M.MODE, M.MARGIN, M.CCR).                 
                                                               
 4.2.5  R.BLOCK                                                
                                                               
   R.BLOCK erases or fills an area of the screen according to  
   M.MODE.  The coordinates of two opposing corners of the area
   are placed in memory as described below.  HL points to the  
   address of the first byte of the list.  Since any two       
   opposing corners can be selected, the resident must not make
   any assumptions about which corner is which.                
                                                               
   At the completion of the block operation, the screen        
   location should be set to the upper left hand corner of the 
   block, minus 15 in the direction (i.e., if (X ,Y ) is the   
   upper left hand corner of the block, the current (X,Y)      
   location should be set to (X , Y -15)).                     
                               1   1                           
        Entry        HL = Memory Address of Coordinates        
                     M.MODE contains screen mode               
                     Exit condition                            
                             X = X  and Y = Y  - 15            
                                  1          1                 
             (HL) + 0 = X  lower 8 bits                        
             (HL) + 1 = X1 upper bit                           
             (HL) + 2 = Y1 lower 8 bits                        
             (HL) + 3 = Y1 upper bit                           
             (HL) + 4 = X  lower 8 bits                         
             (HL) + 5 = X2 upper bit                            
             (HL) + 6 = Y2 lower 8 bits                         
             (HL) + 7 = Y2 upper bit                            
                         2                                      
 4.2.6  R.INPX                                                  
                                                                
   This routine will read the current X coordinate and return   
   to the caller with the coordinate in HL register pair.       
   The resident should always truncate this to 9 bits.          
                                                                
             Entry - No preset condition required.              
             Exit - HL = Current X coordinate.                  
                                                                
 4.2.7  R.INPY                                                  
                                                                
   This routine will read the current Y coordinate and return   
   to the caller with the coordinate in HL register pair.       
                                                                
             Entry - No preset condition required.              
             Exit - HL = Current Y coordinate.                  
                                                                
 4.2.8  R.OUTX                                                  
                                                                
   This routine sets the contents of HL register pair as the    
   new X coordinate for the display. The Y coordinate is not    
   affected.  The resident must always truncate this value to   
   nine bits (in the range 0 .. 511).                           
                                                                
             Entry - HL = New X coordinate.                     
                                                                
 4.2.9  R.OUTY                                                 
                                                               
   Sets the current Y coordinate to the contents of HL.  The X 
   coordinate is not affected.  The resident must always       
   truncate this value to nine bits.                           
                                                               
             Entry - HL = New Y coordinate.                    
                                                             
 4.2.10  R.XMIT                                                
                                                               
   This routine provides communication from Micro PLATO to the 
   host.  HL contains a 10-bit PLATO keycode.  The bottom eight
   bits are the key while the upper two bits are the key       
   identifier.  This identifier is basically the same as the   
   identifier described in section 3.2.3.3, except that ID     
   bits 00 are keyboard data rather than echo response data.   
   Thus, for ID bits 01 through 11 the ten-bit key is          
   transmitted to the host as described in section 3.2.3.3.    
                                                               
   Keyboard data, however, must be converted from the internal 
   Micro PLATO codes to ASCII before being sent.  The table in 
   Appendix D describes the required translation from Micro    
   PLATO format to ASCII.  Note that if flow control is turned 
   on the keys must be translated into the flow control key-   
   mapping rather than the original keymapping.                
 
 4.2.11  R.MODE                                                 
                                                                
   This routine can be used to change operating modes of the    
   terminal, set the screen mode for Micro PLATO, and erase     
   the screen.  This routine should be called to change M.MODE. 
   If M.MODE is changed directly the terminal may not operate   
   correctly.                                                   
                                                                
   The HL register contains the new value of M.MODE.            
                                                                
   The significance of each bit is as follows:                  
                                                                
        Bits       b8 b7 b6 b5 b4 b3 b2 b1                      
                    0  0  M  M  M  S  S  E                      
                                                                
        Bit 1:       1 = erase screen, 0 = do not erase screen. 
                     (See section 3.2.3.1.2.4.4 for a           
                     description of the actions taken when the  
                     screen is erased.)                         
        Bits 2 to 3: 00 -- mode inverse                         
                     01 -- mode rewrite                         
                     10 -- mode erase                           
                     11 -- mode write                           
        Bits 4 to 6: current data processing mode.  This is     
                     valid only on CDC terminals.               
                                                                
   At the completion of this routine, the data passed to it is  
   stored in variable M.MODE. Before it is stored, the data is  
   shifted right, shifting off the erase bit. The screen mode   
   bits will be the least significant bits of the stored        
   data.                                                        
                                                              
                                                               
             Entry - HL = Data: Mode, screen mode, screen erase
             Exit - M.MODE = Right shifted HL data.            
                                                               
 4.2.12  R.STEPX                                               
                                                               
   This routine will step the X Coordinate one dot position.   
   The direction of the step is dependant upon the direction   
   bits set in M.DIR. The Y coordinate is not affected.        
                                                               
             Entry - M.DIR set for desired direction by        
                     previously executed R.DIR.                
             Exit - X coordinate set according to the bit in   
                    M.DIR.                                     
                                                               
                                                               
 4.2.13  R.STEPY                                               
                                                               
   This routine will step the Y Coordinate one dot position.   
   The direction of the step is dependant upon the direction   
   bits set in M.DIR. The X coordinate is not affected.        
                                                               
             Entry - M.DIR set for desired direction by        
                     previously executed R.DIR.                
             Exit - Y coordinate set according to M.DIR.       
                                                               
  4.2.14  R.WE                                                   
                                                                
   This routine will write or erase one dot position specified  
   by the current coordinates.                                  
                                                                
             Entry - M.MODE set for desired write or erase      
                     operation by previously executed R.MODE.   
             Exit - Dot at current (X,Y) location set according 
                    to M.MODE.                                  
                                                                
 4.2.15  R.DIR                                                  
                                                                
   This routine sets the direction of the step routines. The    
   lower 2 bits of HL register pair are referenced and stored   
   for the X/Y directions as follows:                           
                                                                
             Bit 1:  0 = Step Y forward (up)                    
                     1 = Step Y reverse (down)                  
             Bit 2:  0 = Step X forward (right)                 
                     1 = Step X reverse (left)                  
                                                                
             Entry - HL = Direction bits                        
             Exit - M.DIR = Direction bits                      
                                                                
                                                                
 4.2.16  R.INPUT                                                
                                                                
   This routine allows the Micro PLATO interpreter to get input 
   from the keyboard and other devices.  The variable M.KSW     
   indicates what input devices send data where.  When bit 1    
   is set to 1 keyboard and touch panel keys should be sent     
   to Micro PLATO.  When bit 1 is 0, these keys should be sent  
   to the host.  When bit 2 is set to 1, external keys (from   
   external devices) should be sent to Micro PLATO, and when   
   bit 2 is 0, these keys should be sent to the host.  At no   
   time should echo keys or unsolicited status words be sent   
   to Micro PLATO.                                             
                                                               
   Upon returning from R.INPUT the HL register pair contains   
   the following:                                              
                                                               
                     H REGISTER              L REGISTER        
   Keyboard          0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0         0 <--KEY DATA-->  
   Touch Panel       0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1         4 bit X  4 bit Y  
   External          0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0         8 bits ext. data  
                                                               
   Each time R.INPUT is called, one word from the user buffer  
   is retreived. If the most significant bit of H register is  
   set to one, the buffer is empty and the data is invalid.    
   Conversely, if the most significant bit is zero, the data   
   is valid.                                                   
                                                               
   When key data is received, it is coded in the Micro PLATO   
   key codes listed in Appendix D.  These codes are not ASCII. 
                                                               
 4.2.17  R.SSF                                                 
                                                               
   This routine operates identically to the SSF command        
   described in section 3.2.3.1.6.  Upon entry the HL register 
   pair must contain information identical to bits 01 through  
   15 of the SSF command format.  If a read operation is       
   selected, the data read from the device will be returned in 
   the L register if M.KSW is set appropriately.                
                                                                
   If a set interrupt mask operation is selected, a copy of     
   the interrupt mask must be placed in the M.ENAB variable.    
   Micro PLATO will use that information in subsequent calls    
   to set the interrupt mask, so it must be maintained.         
                                                                
 4.2.18  R.CCR                                                  
                                                                
   This routine is used to establish character plotting         
   parameters and select character sets (M0 to M7) to be used   
   by the character generator. The character plotting           
   information is passed to this routine as the contents of     
   HL registers as follows:                                     
                                                                
             BIT             FUNCTION                           
                                                                
             1               1 = vertical, 0 = horizontal       
             2 to 4          Selects character set 0 to 7       
             5               unused                             
             6               1 = size two, 0 = size zero        
             7               1 = reverse, 0 = forward           
             8               Uncover code flag                  
             9 to 16         Unused                             
                                                                
        Entry: HL is new value for M.CCR.                       
        Exit:  M.CCR set and other values initialized that      
               depend on the values in this variable.           
  4.2.19  R.EXTOUT                                               
                                                                
   This routine outputs data to the device selected in R.SSF.   
   The user stores data in memory and passes the address of the 
   data in HL register pair, and the length in bytes in DE      
   register pair.                                               
                                                                
             Entry - HL = Origin (First Word Address)           
                     DE = Length (Number of Bytes)              
                                                                
             Exit -  Data output to the device.                 
                                                                
 4.2.20  R.EXEC                                                 
                                                                
   R.EXEC should process all the data that has built up in      
   the buffer from the host while Micro PLATO has had control.  
   It should also transmit any data that has built up in the    
   buffer to the host, if there is any.                         
                                                                
   For simultaneous display of Micro PLATO and host output, the 
   Micro PLATO interpreter will call R.EXEC periodically.       
                                                                
 4.2.21  R.GJOB                                                 
                                                                
   This routine will retrieve one byte from the host receive    
   buffer and return it to the user program in the C register.  
   These bytes are the raw ASCII codes received directly from   
   the host.                                                    
                                                                
   This routine must not be called unless the variable M.JOBS   
   is non-zero.                                                 
             Entry - none                                       
             Exit - C register = data from host receive buffer  
                                                                
 4.2.22  R.XJOB                                                 
                                                                
   This routine 'executes' the byte in the C register as though 
   it was received over the communications line.  This might be 
   used to monitor everything that is received from the host    
   if used in conjunction with the R.GJOB routine.              
                                                                
   Note that some commands and data units are longer than       
   one byte, and therefore require a call to R.XJOB for each    
   byte.                                                        
                                                                
   Also note that the terminal controlware resident will abort  
   a command or data element in process upon the receipt of     
   a control code.                                              
                                                                
             Entry - C register = byte to be processed          
             Exit - none                                        
                                                                
                                                                
 4.2.23  R.RETURN                                               
                                                                
   This is an obsolete entry point which was used to return     
   control to the resident after control was received by the    
   resident during interrupt processing via the M.EXTPA         
   interrupt handler.  Interrupt routines should do a simple    
   return instruction to their caller when complete.
           
 4.2.24  R.CHRCV                                                
                                                                
   This routine is used to convert character set data           
   in the eight word format used by the host and Micro PLATO    
   into a form usable for character generation.  The low byte   
   of each word is the lower half of the vertical character     
   strip, and the upper byte is the upper half of the strip,    
   as described in section 3.2.3.1.2.3.                         
                                                                
             Entry - DE = First word address of character data. 
                     HL = Number of characters to convert,      
                     each character consisting of 16 bytes.     
                                                                
   On CDC terminals R.CHRCV should operate on the character     
   set in place, at the address specified.                      
                                                                
   On other machines the character set should be translated     
   into the resident's character set memory.  The resident will 
   be able to tell what character is being loaded by examining  
   the MEM2 variable, which the Micro PLATO interpreter will    
   set to the base of its character set.  So, the character     
   slot number is computed by ((DE) - (MEM2))/16 (the contents  
   of DE minus the contents of MEM2 divided by 16).  Micro      
   PLATO assumes that M2 and M3 are contiguous, so characters   
   in the range 0 to 63 are in M2 and characters in the         
   range 64 to 127 are in M3.                                   
                                                                
  4.2.25  R.ALARM                                                
                                                                
   This routine sounds the terminal's alarm.                    
                                                                
 4.2.26  R.PRINT                                                
                                                                
   The propose of R.PRINT is to allow Micro PLATO to initiate a 
   screen copy.  The STOP or SHIFT-STOP keys will be active     
   during the screen copy to allow the user to abort it before  
   it is done.                                                  
                                                                
   There are no parameters to the R.PRINT routine.  Upon exit   
   status will be returned in the HL register as follows:       
                                                                
        Exit: HL =                                              
             0000 hex = screen copy completed, no errors.       
             8000 hex = screen copy not available.              
             8001 hex = printer not connected or turned off.    
             8002 hex = printer not ready, out of paper.        
                                                                
 4.2.27  R.FCOLOR                                               
                                                                
   This routine sets the foreground color to be used in         
   subsequent graphics operations.  The color is a 24-bit       
   number passed in the the H, L and D registers.  The color    
   is maintained internally by Micro PLATO and the resident:    
   there is no M. variable for color.                           
                                                                
        Entry:                                                  
             H: red intensity value                             
             L: green intensity value                           
             D: blue intensity value                            
                                                               
 4.2.28  R.BCOLOR                                               
                                                                
   This routine sets the background color to be used in         
   subsequent graphics operations.  The color is a 24-bit       
   number passed in the the H, L and D registers.               
                                                                
        Entry:                                                  
             H: red intensity value                             
             L: green intensity value                           
             D: blue intensity value                            
                                                                
 4.2.29  R.PAINT                                                
                                                                
   This routine initiates a paint operation, as described in    
   section 3.2.3.1.8.  There are no arguments or returned       
   values.  Only the solid fill option is currently availble    
   through this entry point.                                    
                                                                
             Entry - HL = 0 for solid fill                      
                     HL = non-zero value for character fill     
                     when that feature is added.  The format    
                     will be defined at a later date.           
                                                                
 4.3  Terminal Common Variables                                 
                                                                
   The "M." variables are used to communicate between the       
   resident and the Micro PLATO interpreter.  Almost all of     
   these variables should be changed only by calling the        
   corresponding "R." entry point.  This is because some        
   variables, such as the current (X,Y) coordinates, cause      
   other internal resident variables to change or hardware to   
   be initialized.  Certain variables, however, can be written  
                                                               
 4.3  Terminal Common Variables (continued)                     
                                                                
   directly by the Micro PLATO interpreter: M.EXTPA, M.MARGIN,  
   M.KSW, the mode 5, 6, and 7 addresses and the MEM2 alternate 
   character set address.  All variables may be read without    
   restriction.                                                 
                                                                
   The addresses of the M. variables is given in the processor  
   specific information in section C.                           
                                                                
 4.3.1  M.LDFILE                                                
                                                                
   This single byte variable contains the terminal resident     
   load file number.  The values are listed in 3.2.3.1.4.3.     
                                                                
   Non-CDC terminals should place zero in this variable.        
                                                                
 4.3.2  M.SBTYPE                                                
                                                                
   This eight-bit variable contains the terminal subtype.  Its  
   values are described in section 3.2.3.1.4.2.                 
                                                                
 4.3.3  M.CONFIG                                                
                                                                
   This single byte variable contains the terminal resident     
   hardware configuration.  See section 3.2.3.1.4.4 for the     
   values it can contain.                                       
                                                                
 4.3.4  M.M0                                                    
                                                                
   This two-byte variable contains the beginning address in     
   memory of the M0 character set. The beginning address of M1  
   character set is 620 hex greater than the beginning address  
   of M0. This is useful only in CDC terminals.  Non-CDC        
   terminals need not set this value.                           
                                                                
 4.3.5  M.VERS                                                  
                                                                
   This location contains the version of the controlware        
   resident that is loaded in the terminal memory.              
                                                              
 4.3.6  M.TYPE                                                  
                                                                
   This eight-bit variable contains the terminal type and the   
   terminal configuration.  All ASCII terminals must set this   
   variable to 12 decimal.                                      
                                                                
   The contents of M.TYPE are defined as follows for other      
   terminals.                                                   
                                                                
        Bits 1-4     Meaning                                    
             0       Magnavox                                   
             1       PDP-11                                     
             2       IST-I, version B04, 4k memory              
             3       IST-I, version B05C, 8k memory             
             4       IST-I, version B05                         
             5       IST-II & IST-III (without error detection) 
             6       IST-I, version B04, 8k memory              
             7       IST-I, version B04, 24k memory             
             8       PPT Serial Panel                          
             9       PPT Old resident                          
             A       PPT Standard version                      
             B       TV                                        
             C       ASCII terminal                            
             D       New TV                                    
             E       IST-I, version B006                       
             F       IST-II and IST-III, (enhanced error)      
                                                               
   All types are included for reference.                       
                                                               
   Bits 5 to 7 (terminal configuration)                        
                                                               
                 IST-I     IST-II     IST-I        IST-I       
                           IST-III    IST-II       IST-II      
        CODE     MEMORY    MEMORY     TOUCH PANEL  VERSION     
                                                               
         0     Unassigned   16K         no T. P.    Production 
         1     Unassigned   32K         no T. P.    Production 
         2     4K Memory    16K         With T. P.  Production 
         3     20K Memory   32K         With T. P.  Production 
         4     Unassigned   16K         no T. P.   Experimental
         5     Unassigned   32K         no T. P.   Experimental
         6     8K Memory    16K       With  T. P.  Experimental
         7     24K Memory   32K       With  T. P.  Experimental

  4.3.7  M.CLOCK                                                 
                                                                
   This location is incremented once every 17.5 milliseconds on 
   CDC terminals.  Since it is a sixteen bit value it will wrap 
   around at 65535 back to 0.  The variable should be           
   incremented by that value on other machines if possible, and 
   if not it should be updated at some interval because Micro   
   PLATO uses it as a random number seed.                       
                                                                
 4.3.8  M.EXTPA                                                 
                                                                
   This sixteen bit variable holds the external processor       
   address.  When an interrupt for an external device occurs,   
   this variable should be examined.  If zero, the resident     
   should read in a byte from the interrupting device, format   
   it as an external key and send it to either the host or      
   Micro PLATO depending on M.KSW..  If M.EXTPA is non-zero, it 
   is an address for the Micro PLATO interrupt handler.         
   Control should be passed to the address that M.EXTPA points  
   to.  After Micro PLATO has performed its task, it will       
   return control to the resident via a return instruction.     
   The resident should then re-enable interrupts and perform    
   any other post-interrupt processing required.                
                                                                
   This variable is set by Micro PLATO directly.                
                                                              
 4.3.9  M.MARGIN                                               
                                                               
   This sixteen bit variable contains the current margin.  This
   margin should be used by the R.CHARS routine when a carriage
   return is peformed.  The Micro PLATO interpreter will set   
   this variable directly.                                     
                                                               
 4.3.10  M.JOBS                                                
                                                               
   This one byte variable contains the number of bytes in the  
   receive buffer.  A zero value indicates the buffer is       
   empty.  The full value will depend upon the terminal,       
   because the size of the receive buffer may vary between     
   terminal types.                                             
                                                               
   Since this is a single byte value, terminals with buffers   
   larger than 256 bytes should put 255 in this location when  
   there are 255 or more characters in the receive buffer.     
                                                               
 4.3.11  M.CCR                                                 
                                                               
   This single byte variable contains the character plotting   
   parameters.  R.CCR must be called to set this variable.  The
   contents of M.CCR are:                                      
                                                               
        Bit          Description                               
                                                               
         1           Vertical plotting when = to one,          
                     horizontal when = zero.                   
         2, 3, 4     Set to 0 through 7 for selected character 
                     set M0 through M7 (Micro PLATO character  
                     set numbering)                            
         5           Unused                                    
         6           1 = size 2 characters, 0 = size 0.        
         7           1 = reverse plotting, 0 = forward.        
         8           Uncover code flag, used by R.CHARS.       
                                                               
 4.3.12  M.MODE                                                
                                                               
   This variable contains the current terminal operating mode  
   and the screen mode.  R.MODE must be called to set this     
   variable.  The format of M.MODE is the same as the parameter
   passed to R.MODE except that M.MODE is shifted right 1 bit  
   position.                                                   
                                                               
   The contents of M.MODE are:                                 
                                                               
        Bit          Description                               
                                                               
                  Screen mode bits                             
                                                               
        1    2       Mode 3                  All Other Modes   
                                                               
        0    0       Inverse                 Erase             
        0    1       Rewrite                 Write             
        1    0       Erase                   Erase             
        1    1       Write                   Write             
                                                               
        5   4   3            Processing mode (CDC terminals)   
                                                               
        0   0   0            Point Plot                        
        0   0   1            Draw Line                         
        0   1   0            Load Memory                        
        0   1   1            Character Plot                     
        1   0   0            Block Write/Erase                  
        1   0   1            User Program                       
        1   1   0            User Program                       
        1   1   1            User Program                       
                                                                
        8   7   6            These bits should be zero.         
                                                                
 4.3.13  M.DIR                                                  
                                                                
   This variable contains flags to indicate the direction of    
   movement for both the X and Y coordinates when the user      
   calls routine R.STEPX or R.STEPY.  R.DIR must be called to   
   set this variable.                                           
                                                                
   The contents of M.DIR are as follows:                        
                                                                
        Bit          Description                                
                                                                
        1            0 = increment Y coordinate.                
                     1 = decrement Y coordinate.                
        2            0 = increment X coordinate                 
                     1 = decrement X coordinate                 
        3 to 8       Not used.  
                                
 4.3.14  M.KSW                                                  
                                                                
   This variable determines whether the data from the keyboard, 
   touch panel, or external device are to be passed to the host 
   or to Micro PLATO.  The variable must be set directly by     
   Micro PLATO.  See sections 3.2.3.4 and 4.2.16 for further    
   discussion.                                                  
                                                                
   If bit 1 of M.KSW is 1 keyboard and touch panel input        
   should be sent to Micro PLATO.  If it is 0, then data from   
   those sources is sent to the host.                           
                                                                
   If bit 2 of M.KSW is 1 external data should be sent to       
   Micro PLATO, otherwise it should be formatted as external    
   keys and sent to the host.                                   
                                                                
 4.3.15  M.ENAB                                                 
                                                                
   This variable contains the internal interrupt mask.  It must 
   be set by calling R.SSF.                                     
                                                                
   The contents of M.ENAB are as follows:                       
                                                                
        Bit  Description                                        
                                                                
        1    Unassigned                                         
        2    Unassigned                                         
        3    Unassigned                                         
        4    1 = Enable external channels interrupt             
             0 = Disable external channels interrupt            
        5    Always one                                         
        6    1 = Enable touch panel                             
             0 = Disable touch panel                           
        7    Always one                                        
        8    Always one                                        
                                                               
 4.3.16  Mode 5, 6 and 7 addresses                             
                                                               
   These sixteen bit variables are set by Micro PLATO directly.
   When the resident receives data from the host in modes 5,   
   6 or 7, the corresponding address (MOD5A, MOD6A or MOD7A)   
   should be examined.  If non-zero, control should be         
   transferred to the address pointed to and the data from     
   the host passed in the appropriate registers (see section   
   3.2.3.1.2.6).                                               
                                                               
 4.3.17  Character memory addresses                            
                                                               
   These variables contain the addresses of the character      
   set memories.  Only MEM2 and MEM3 are used currently.  When 
   Micro PLATO loads a character set these variables will be   
   loaded with the base addresses of the memories involved.    
   On CDC terminals the character sets will be stored and      
   converted in place at these addresses.  On other machines,  
   the character sets are copied and converted to an internal  
   representation inside the resident.                         
                                                               
 4.3.18  M.HALT                                                 
                                                                
   This variable is used to stop execution of programs running  
   in the terminal.  Such programs, called PPT programs (for    
   Programmable Plato Terminal), must monitor this location     
   themselves to determine whether they should halt.  The       
   values of the bits for M.HALT are:                           
                                                                
        Bits 8 to 3: 0                                          
        Bit 2: Independant program stop bit.                    
        Bit 1: Dependant program stop bit.                      
                                                                
   When lesson-dependant programs find the dependant program    
   stop bit set, they should stop execution and return to the   
   resident.  Similarly, when lesson-independant programs find  
   the independant program stop bit set, they should return to  
   the resident.  The host will write into this variable with   
   load memory commands.  Thus, only CDC terminals will         
   support this option.  In fact, the residents are oblivious   
   to all this, except that they provide the low-level services 
   to the PPT programs and the host.                            
                                                                
 4.3.19  M.STATUS                                               
                                                                
   This variable is used to control the execution of programs   
   running in the terminal from the host.   The values of the   
   bits and their functions are:                                
                                                                
        Bit 8 = 0                                               
        Bit 7 = 0                                               
        Bit 6 = 1                                               
        Bit 5 = Complement of the independant program bit       
        Bit 4 = Complement of the dependant program bit        
        Bit 3 = 0                                              
        Bit 2 = Independant program bit                        
        Bit 1 = Dependant program bit                          
                                                               
   If a lesson-dependant program is running in the terminal    
   the dependant bit is set to one.  If a lesson independant   
   program is running, then the independant bit is set to one. 
   The host is able to query this variable to determine the    
   status of programs running in the terminal.                 
                                                               
   Note: the resident is not involved in this process at all,  
   except that it serves as an intermediary, providing the     
   program with data from the host via mode 5, 6 and 7, and    
   sending data to the host for the program via the R.XMIT     
   entry point.                                                
                                                               
 5  Appendix A: PLATO character set                            
                                                               
                                                               
        CHARACTER SET M0                                       
                               High nibble                     
                                                               
   Low  nibble         00   10   20   30   40   50   60   70   
                                                               
                0      NUL  DLE   SP   0    @    P    `    p   
                1      SOH  DC1   !    1    A    Q    a    q   
                2      STX  DC2   "    2    B    R    b    r   
                3      ETX  DC3   #    3    C    S    c    s   
                4      EOT  DC4   $    4    D    T    d    t   
                5      ENQ  NAK   %    5    E    U    e    u   
                6      ACK  SYN   &    6    F    V    f    v   
                7      BEL  ETB   '    7    G    W    g    w   
                8      BS   CAN   (    8    H    X    h    x   
                9      HT   EM    )    9    I    Y    i    y   
                a      LF   SUB   *    :    J    Z    j    z   
                b      VT   ESC   +    ;    K    [    k    {   
                c      FF   FS    ,    <    L    \    l    |   
                d      CR   GS    -    =    M    ]    m    }   
                e      SO   RS    .    >    N    ^    n    ~   
                f      SI   US    /    ?    O    _    o   del  
                                                                
        CHARACTER SET M1                                       
                                                               
   20    SP          30               40    _                 
   21    /           31               41     (umlaut)        
   22                         32               42                     
   23    ~           33               43                      
   24                         34               44                     
   25               35               45                     
   26                         36               46     (acute accent)  
   27                         37               47     (cedilla)       
   28                         38               48     (haek)         
   29                         39               49                     
   2a               3a               4a    |                 
   2b               3b                                       
   2c               3c                                       
   2d                         3d                                       
   2e                         3e                                       
   2f               3f                                       
                                                               
   Notes: character 40 should combine with the left and right  
   parentheses of the M0 character set to form the copyright   
   symbol: .  The cedilla () should combine with c to      
   form  correctly.  The other diacritics (, `, ~, ,  and  
   ^) should combine with other letters: , , , , , .     

 6  Appendix B: Protocol summary                               
                                                               
   This appendix contains a summary of the PLATO host control  
   codes and escape sequences.                                 
                                                               
 6.1  Control Codes                                            
                                                               
   CONTROL    HEX                                              
   CHARACTER  CODE                                             
     BS       08      Backspace.  Moves one character width    
                      back.                                    
     HT       09      Tab.  Moves one character width.         
     LF       0A      Linefeed.  Moves one character height    
                      down.                                    
     VT       0B      Vertical tab.  Moves one character height
                      up.                                      
     FF       0C      Form feed.  Set (X,Y) position to top of 
                      page.                                    
     CR       0D      Carriage return.  Set (X,Y) to margin    
                      on next line.                            
     EM       19      Selects block write/erase mode (mode 4). 
     ESC      1B      Causes terminal to examine the next      
                      character to determine if it is a valid  
                      escape sequence.                         
     FS       1C      Selects point-plot mode (mode 0).        
     GS       1D      Selects draw line mode (mode 1).         
     US       1F      Selects alpha mode (mode 3).             
                                                               
   Note: control codes received not included here should be    
   ignored.                                                    
                                                               
 6.2  Escape Sequences                                          
                                                                
   ESC SOH   Used to select Tektronix emulation mode in CDC IST 
             III graphics and in the Viking 721-30 residents.   
   ESC STX   Select PLATO operation.                            
   ESC ETX   Select TTY operation.                              
   ESC FF    Clear screen without resetting (X,Y).              
   ESC DC1   Select inverse video screen mode.                  
   ESC DC2   Select mode write.                                 
   ESC DC3   Select mode erase.                                 
   ESC DC4   Select mode rewrite.                               
   ESC ESC   This has no function, but the resident must still  
             recognize a character coming after two escapes as  
             a valid escape sequence (that is, ESC ESC FF       
             should be interpreted as ESC FF).                  
   ESC 2     Load Coordinate command                            
   ESC @     Superscript                                        
   ESC A     Subscript                                          
   ESC B     Select Character set M0.                           
   ESC C     Select Character set M1.                           
   ESC D     Select Character set M2.                           
   ESC E     Select Character set M3.                           
   ESC F     Select Character set M4.                           
   ESC G     Select Character set M5.                           
   ESC H     Select Character set M6.                           
   ESC I     Select Character set M7.                           
   ESC J     Select horizontal.                                 
   ESC K     Select vertical.                                   
   ESC L     Select forward.                                    
   ESC M     Select reverse.                                    
   ESC N     Select size 0.                                     
   ESC O     Select size 2.                                     
   ESC P     Load memory (mode 2 data with character convert).  
   ESC Q     SSF command.                                       
   ESC R     External data.                                     
   ESC S     Load memory (mode 2 data).                         
   ESC T     Select mode 5.                                     
   ESC U     Select mode 6.                                     
   ESC V     Select mode 7.                                     
   ESC W     Load Memory Address command.                       
   ESC Y     Load Echo command.                                 
   ESC Z     Set Margin.                                        
   ESC a     Set foreground color.                              
   ESC b     Set background color.                              
   ESC c     Paint.                                             
                                                                
   Note:  Escape sequences not shown have no effect on the      
     terminal.                                                  
                                                                
 7  Appendix C: Processor information                           
                                                                
   This appendix gives the mapping of the Z80 register set      
   to that of other processors.  It also enumerates assumptions 
   made about the environment of Micro PLATO.                   
                                                                
 7.1  Z80                                                       
 
 7.1.1  Register mapping                                       
                                                               
   The Z80 registers all map to themselves.  When the resident 
   is called, it must preserve the IX and IY registers.  All   
   other registers may be changed.                             
                                                               
 7.1.2  M. and R. addresses                                    
                                                               
   The R. table consists of a sequence of jump instructions    
   to the appropriate routines, so each entry is three bytes   
   long.                                                       
                                                               
        Hex                                                    
      Address  Label                                           
                                                               
        0040   R.INIT                                          
        0043   R.DOT                                           
        0046   R.LINE                                          
        0049   R.CHARS                                         
        004C   R.BLOCK                                         
        004F   R.INPX                                          
        0052   R.INPY                                          
        0055   R.OUTX                                          
        0058   R.OUTY                                          
        005B   R.XMIT                                          
        005E   R.MODE                                          
        0061   R.STEPX                                         
        0064   R.STEPY                                         
        0067   R.WE                                            
        006A   R.DIR                                           
        006D   R.INPUT                                         
        0070   R.SSF                                           
 7.1.2  M. and R. addresses (continued)                         
                                                                
        0073   R.CCR                                            
        0076   R.EXTOUT                                         
        0079   R.EXEC                                           
        007C   R.GJOB                                           
        007F   R.XJOB                                           
        0082   R.RETURN                                         
        0085   R.CHRCV                                          
        0088   R.ALARM                                          
        008B   R.PRINT                                          
                                                                
   The following table gives the offsets of the M. variables    
   for the Z80 processor.                                       
                                                                
        Hex                                                     
      Address  Label       Description                          
                                                                
        22E5   M.LDFILE    Controlware load file number         
        22E6   M.SBTYPE    Terminal Subtype                     
        22E7   M.CONFIG    Terminal Configuration               
        22E8   M.M0        Location of M0 character set         
        22EA   M.VERS      Controlware version                  
        22EB   M.TYPE      Terminal Type                        
        22EC   M.CLOCK     Real-time Clock                      
        22EE   M.EXTPA     Interrupt Processor Address          
        22F0   M.MARGIN    Margin used for Carriage Returns     
        22F2   M.JOBS      Job Stack Count                      
        22F4   M.CCR       Character Plotting Parameters        
        22F6   M.MODE      Current Terminal Operating Mode      
        22F8   M.DIR       Direction of Coordinate Step         
        22FA   M.KSW       Device Input Director                
        22FC   M.ENAB      Internal Interrupt Mask             
        22FE   unused                                          
        2300   MOD5A       Mode 5 Entry Address                
        2302   MOD6A       Mode 6 Entry Address                
        2304   MOD7A       Mode 7 Entry Address                
        2306   M2          Character Set M2 First Word Address 
        2308   M3          Character Set M3 First Word Address 
        230A   M4          Character Set M4 First Word Address 
        230C   M5          Character Set M5 First Word Address 
        230E   M6          Character Set M6 First Word Address 
        2310   M7          Character Set M7 First Word Address 
        2314   M.HALT      Turns off user program              
        2316   M.STATUS    Status of usert program             
                                                               
 7.1.3  Micro PLATO interpreter loading                        
                                                               
   On CDC terminals the boot ROM reads in a control program    
   from the disk drive.  This control program determines the   
   type of the terminal (IST III, IST II or Viking) and reads  
   in the appropriate resident.  The Micro PLATO interpreter is
   also read into memory by this program.  Control is passed to
   different locations in the resident, depending on whether   
   the resident was loaded from disk or from the host.  If the 
   resident was loaded from disk, initializations are performed
   and control is passed to the Micro PLATO interpreter whose  
   address is known to the resident.  If the resident was      
   loaded from the host, it goes into TTY mode immediately.    
                                                               
 7.2  8086                                                      
                                                                
   This section describes Micro PLATO under the MSDOS and       
   derivative operating systems using an 8086 or compatible     
   microprocessor.                                              
                                                                
 7.2.1  Register mapping                                        
                                                                
   On the 8086 and compatible processors (8088, 80186, 80188    
   and 80286) Micro PLATO must be in a single segment (that is, 
   the DS, ES and CS registers are set to the same value).      
   Micro PLATO does not use the stack explicitly except for     
   pushing and popping, so it may reside anywhere except in     
   Micro PLATO's segment.                                       
                                                                
   Micro PLATO uses all the registers (including BP).  Micro    
   PLATO assumes that SI and DI are unchanged between calls     
   to the resident.  Any other registers may be modified.       
                                                                
   The correspondence used between Z80 and 8086 registers is:   
                                                                
        Z80  8086                                               
         A    AL                                                
         H    BH                                                
         L    BL                                                
         D    DH                                                
         E    DL                                                
         B    CH                                                
         C    CL                                                
         IX   SI                                                
         IY   DI   
                                             
 7.2.2  M. and R. addresses                                  
                                                             
   The Micro PLATO interpreter performs only short calls.    
   The R. entry points must be far calls followed by short   
   returns.  Each jump table entry is then six bytes.  The   
   table below gives the offsets for the R. routines.  (All  
   values in hex.)                                           
                                                             
    r.init   equ    0000                                     
    r.dot    equ    0006                                     
    r.line   equ    000c                                     
    r.chars  equ    0012                                     
    r.block  equ    0018                                     
    r.inpx   equ    001e                                     
    r.inpy   equ    0024                                     
    r.outx   equ    002a                                     
    r.outy   equ    0030                                     
    r.xmit   equ    0036                                     
    r.mode   equ    003c                                     
    r.stepx  equ    0042                                     
    r.stepy  equ    0048                                     
    r.we     equ    004e                                     
    r.dir    equ    0054                                     
    r.input  equ    005a                                     
    r.ssf    equ    0060                                     
    r.ccr    equ    0066                                     
    r.exto   equ    006c                                     
    r.exec   equ    0072                                     
    r.gjob   equ    0078                                     
    r.xjob   equ    007e                                     
    r.return equ    0084                                     
    r.chrcv  equ    008a  
                                   
 7.2.2  M. and R. addresses (continued)                      
                                                             
    r.alarm  equ    0090                                     
    r.print  equ    0096                                     
    r.fcolor equ    009c                                     
    r.bcolor equ    00a2                                     
    r.paint  equ    00a8                                     
    r.dummy1 equ    00ae                                     
    r.dummy2 equ    00b4                                     
    r.dummy3 equ    00ba                                     
                                                             
   (The entry points r.dummy1, r.dummy2 and r.dummy3 are     
   reserved for future use.  They should simply return.)     
                                                             
   The M. table for the 8086 is as follows:                  
                                                             
    m.ldfile equ     00c0                                    
    m.sbtype equ     00c1                                    
    m.config equ     00c2                                    
    m0       equ     00c3                                    
    m.vers   equ     00c5                                    
    m.type   equ     00c6                                    
    m.clock  equ     00c7                                    
    m.extpa  equ     00c9                                    
    m.margin equ     00cb                                    
    m.jobs   equ     00cd                                    
    m.ccr    equ     00cf                                    
    m.mode   equ     00d1                                    
    m.dir    equ     00d3                                    
    m.ksw    equ     00d5                                    
    m.enab   equ     00d7                                    
    mod5a    equ     00db                                    
    mod6a    equ     00dd                                     
    mod7a    equ     00df                                     
    m2       equ     00e1                                     
    m3       equ     00e3                                     
    m4       equ     00e5                                     
    m5       equ     00e7                                     
    m6       equ     00e9                                     
    m7       equ     00eb                                     
    m.halt   equ     00ed                                     
    m.status equ     00ef                                     
                                                              
 7.2.3  Micro PLATO interpreter loading                       
                                                              
   Micro PLATO must be loaded in its own segment.  Under MSDOS
   the interpreter is in an absolute binary form and must be  
   loaded into its segment at location 0000.  The entirety    
   of the interpreter file (called MPLATO.SYS) must be loaded 
   at this location.                                          
                                                              
   The M. variables and the R. jump table are placed in the   
   lower part of the Micro PLATO segment.  They should be     
   initialized to the correct values and then control should  
   be passed to the interpreter at location 00f7 hex.  The    
   address of the R.INIT entry point should be pushed on the  
   stack before giving control to Micro PLATO, so that a short
   RET instruction will give control back to the resident.    
                                                              
   When Micro PLATO is executed register BX must contain the  
   highest address available for the interpreter in the       
   segment.  If an entire 64K segment is available, BX should 
   contain 0FFFF hex.  The minimum segment size for Micro PLATO
   is 32K.  If there is insufficient memory the resident should
   not even try to load the interpreter.                       
                                                               
 8  Appendix D: PLATO keycodes                                 
                                                               
   There are two different keymappings used when transmitting  
   keycodes to the PLATO host.  The first is the original PLATO
   ASCII keymapping.  It is used by older terminals and        
   terminals that do not require flow control.  Terminals that 
   are intended to run at higher communications rates (2400 bps
   and greater) may require flow control to prevent buffer     
   overrun.  Such terminals must use the flow control mapping  
   AFTER flow control has been turned on by the host with the  
   flow control echo code.  If they do not receive the flow    
   control echo code, they MUST use the original PLATO ASCII   
   keymapping.                                                 
                                                               
   In the original PLATO ASCII keymapping all keys consist of  
   a single character.  In the flow control keymapping most of 
   the keys retain the same value, but some of the function    
   keys have been changed to other values and some have been   
   changed to two-key sequences (ESC followed by another       
   control character).                                         
                                                               
 8.1  Original PLATO ASCII mapping                              
                                                                
                   MICRO                                        
   PLATO KEY      PLATO KEY       ASCII CHAR.     ASCII CHAR.   
                  CODE (HEX)      GENERATED       CODE (HEX)    
     SYMBOL         SHIFT           SYMBOL          SHIFT       
   LOWER  UPPER     OFF  ON       LOWER  UPPER     OFF  ON      
                                                                
     a      A       41   61         a      A       61   41      
     b      B       42   62         b      B       62   42      
     c      C       43   63         c      C       63   43      
     d      D       44   64         d      D       64   44      
     e      E       45   65         e      E       65   45      
     f      F       46   66         f      F       66   46      
     g      G       47   67         g      G       67   47      
     h      H       48   68         h      H       68   48      
     i      I       49   69         i      I       69   49      
     j      J       4A   6A         j      J       6A   4A      
     k      K       4B   6B         k      K       6B   4B      
     l      L       4C   6C         l      L       6C   4C      
     m      M       4D   6D         m      M       6D   4D      
     n      N       4E   6E         n      N       6E   4E      
     o      O       4F   6F         o      O       6F   4F      
     p      P       50   70         p      P       70   50      
     q      Q       51   71         q      Q       71   51      
     r      R       52   72         r      R       72   52      
     s      S       53   73         s      S       73   53      
     t      T       54   74         t      T       74   54      
     u      U       55   75         u      U       75   55      
     v      V       56   76         v      V       76   56      
     w      W       57   77         w      W       77   57      
     x      X       58   78         x      X       78   58      
     y      Y       59   79         y      Y       79   59      
     z      Z       5A   7A         z      Z       7A   5A      
     0      <       00   20         0      <       30   3C      
     1      >       01   21         1      >       31   3E      
     2      [       02   22         2      [       32   5B      
     3      ]       03   23         3      ]       33   5D      
     4      $       04   24         4      $       34   24      
     5      %       05   25         5      %       35   25      
     6      _       06   26         6      _       36   5F      
     7      '       07   27         7      |       37   7C      
     8      *       08   28         8      *       38   2A      
     9      (       09   29         9      (       39   28      
     =      )       5B   7B         =      )       3D   29      
     +             0E   2E         +      #       2B   23      
                shift      0D   2D         ^      \       5E   5C      
     -             0F   2F          -     ~       2D   7E      
                         0B   2B          -     '       60   27      
                         0A   2A          &     @       26   40      
     ;      :       5C   7C          ;     :       3B   3A      
     .      !       5E   7E          .     !       2E   21      
     ,      "       5F   7F          ,     "       2C   22      
     /      ?       5D   7D          /     ?       2F   3F      
     SUPER  SUPER1  10   30          DC3   ETB     13   17      
     SUB    SUB1    11   31          EOT   ENQ     04   05      
     ANS    TERM    12   32          BEL   DC4     07   14      
     COPY   COPY1   1B   3B          ETX   SYN     03   16      
     TAB    CR      0C   2C          LF    FS      0A   1C      
     ERASE  ERASE1  13   33          BS    EM      08   19      
     MICRO  FONT    14   34          {     DEL     7B   7F      
     HELP   HELP1   15   35          VT    HT      0B   09      
     SQUARE ACCESS  1C   3C          }     NULL    7D   00    
     NEXT   NEXT1   16   36          CR    RS      0D   1E    
     EDIT   EDIT1   17   37          SUB   CAN     1A   18    
     BACK   BACK1   18   38          STX   SO      02   0E    
     LAB    LAB1    1D   3D          FF    SI      0C   0F    
     DATA   DATA1   19   39          DC2   GS      12   1D    
     STOP   STOP1   1A   3A          SOH   DC1     01   11    
     SPACE  BACKSP  40   60          SPACE US      20   1F    
     PRINT  PRINT1  1F   3F          See note 2.              
                                                              
                                                              
   Notes:    1. The CNTL key is not used in PLATO operations. 
                                                              
             2. The print key is used to initiate local       
                printing in the terminal when appropriate     
                printer is attached. It is not transmitted to 
                the PLATO host.                               
                                                              
                                                              
 8.2  Flow control keymapping                                 
                                                              
   To avoid mass duplication of redundant information, only   
   the different keys are listed here.  If a key is not       
   present in this table, it has the value given above in     
   the original PLATO ASCII keymapping.                       
                                                              
   Key name          Orig       New               New         
                     value   ASCII char      Character code   
                                                              
   ACCESS            00      ESC GS          1B 1D            
   SHIFT-SUB         05      ESC EOT         1B 04              
   TAB               0A      TAB             09                 
   SHIFT-HELP        09      LF              0A                 
   SHIFT-STOP        11      ENQ             05                 
   SUPER             13      ETB             17                 
   SHIFT-SUPER       17      ESC ETB         1B 17              
   ' (apostrophe)    7C      '               27                 
                    27      |               7C                 
                                                                
 9  Appendix E: Existing terminals                              
                                                                
   This appendix gives the characteristics of the terminals     
   that have been adapted to use the PLATO ASCII communications 
   protocol.                                                    
                                                                
 9.1  CDC terminals                                             
                                                                
   All Control Data terminals follow the terminal model.  The   
   screen resolution is 512 by 512 with a square aspect ratio.  
                                                                
   The keyboards all have the special PLATO keys labeled on     
   them.                                                        
                                                                
   Every terminal has a clear plastic touch panel for pointing. 
                                                                
   All are monochrome, with the ISTs using black and white      
   monitors and the Viking V721-30 using a green screen.        
                                                                
   There is one serial port available for additional I/O on the 
   IST III.  Two are available on the Viking.  All CDC          
   terminals have a parallel interface that allow connection to 
   intelligent disk drives and other peripherals.               
                                                                
   Screen printing is available on all the terminals with the   
   Viking V721-30 and the IST III for both the CDC 726-10 and   
   726-20 graphics printers, while screen printing on the IST I 
   and IST II is supported for the 726-10 only.                 
                                                                
 9.2  Zenith Z100                                               
                                                                
   The Zenith Z100 has two separate screen resolutions,         
   selectable from the keyboard and by a configuration file.    
   The first is 256v by 512h, giving an 8 by 8 character size.  
   The loadable character set is mapped from 16 by 8 to 8 by 8  
   by oring every two lines into one.  The second resolution is 
   480v by 512h.  A high-persistence monitor is required to     
   minimize flicker in this mode.  A 15 by 8 character size is  
   supported.  The bottom line of the 16 high character is      
   omitted.                                                     
                                                                
   The Z100 has many function keys that are used to map the     
   PLATO function keys and some of the special graphics         
   characters (divide, multiply, etc.).                         
                                                                
   The Z100 has eight colors (black, white, red, green, blue,   
   magenta, cyan and yellow).                                   
                                                                
   A transparent plastic touch panel connected to a serial port 
   is used as an auxiliary pointing device.                     
   Other serial ports are configured to work as other I/O       
   devices, and are able to generate interrupts.                
                                                                
   Screen printing is available for the Epson series of         
   printers through the standard printer port configured by     
   the operating system.                                        
                                                                
 9.3  IBM PC                                                    
                                                                
   The screen resolution of the IBM PC is 256v by 512h, which   
   is accomplished by reprogramming the CRT controller chip     
   in the graphics adapter.                                     
                                                                
   Character sets are 8 by 8, and alternate characters are      
   mapped into physical characters in the same fashion as the   
   Z100.                                                        
                                                                
   The function keys (F1 through F10) are used for PLATO        
   function keys.  In addition, some of the other keys are      
   usurped from their usual function  and made special PLATO    
   keys (for example, escape is the assignment arrow).          
                                                                
   No touch panel or other device is currently implemented.     
                                                                
   The screen is monochrome only.                               
                                                                
   Screen printing is available for the Epson series (including 
   the IBM system printer) on the parallel printer channel      
   only.                                                        
                                                                
 9.4  Apple II                                                 
                                                               
   The screen resolution for an Apple II is 192v by 256h       
   centered in the Apple's true horizontal of 280 dots.  No    
   special reprogramming is done since the Apple does not      
   have a programmable crt controller.                         
                                                               
   Character sets are 4 by 6.  When alternate character sets   
   are loaded, only the lower 4 by 6 of the character is kept. 
   It was felt that it would be better for a human to design   
   a new character set rather than to do the large amount      
   of compression that would be needed to reduce 8 by 16 to    
   4 by 6.                                                     
                                                               
   Function keys are mapped onto the letter keys and prefixed  
   with an ESCAPE.  Pressing ESCAPE twice takes you to a built-
   in help page that can be used to find all key equivalents.  
                                                               
   The touch panel is simulated through the use of game paddles
   or joystick.  Again, the built-in help display explains the 
   procedure.                                                  
                                                               
   For the communications drivers, if there are external       
   switches or setup programs, the device should be set to     
   300 baud, 7 data bits, 1 stop bit, and even parity.  For    
   printers, the user's normal setup should work just fine     
   except any "auto linefeed" option should be turned off.     
   Anything that is specific to a particular card is listed    
   below.                                                      
                                                               
   The only interface cards that should be used at 1200 baud   
   are cards that can generate interrupts.  Currently only     
                                            
   the CCS 7710A and the Apple Super Serial Card can generate   
   interrupts without hardware modification to the interface    
   card.                                                        
                                                                
   Communications drivers:                                      
           * DC Hayes Micromodem II                             
           * Mountain Computer CPS Card                         
           * California Comp. Sys. 7710A Serial Card            
           * Apple Communications Card                          
           * Apple Super Serial Card                            
             The "allow interrupts" switch must be set to "on". 
           * Prometheus VERSAcard                               
                                                                
   RS-232 modems for serial cards:                              
           * General "dumb" modem                               
           * DC Hayes Smartmodem                                
                                                                
                                                                
                                                                
                                                                
                                                                
   Screen prints in 2 sizes can be obtained.  A list of         
   supported printers is below.                                 
   Printers:                                                    
           * Epson MX70/80/100 (with dot graphics)              
                   * Apple Parallel Card                        
                   * Apple Communications Card                  
                   * Mountain CPS Card                          
                     Must have printer connected to parallel    
                     port.                                      
                   * Prometheus Versacard                       
                   * Apple Super Serial Card                    
                   * Apple Serial Card                          
           * NEC PC8023-A                                       
                   * Apple Parallel Card                        
                   * Apple Communications Card                  
                   * Mountain CPS Card                          
                     Must have printer connected to parallel    
                     port.                                      
                   * Prometheus Versacard                       
                   * Apple Super Serial Card                    
                   * Apple Serial Card                          
           * Apple Silentype                                    
                                                                
                                                                
                                                                
 9.5  Atari                                                     
                                                                
   Two screen resolutions are supported by the Atari resident:  
   a 'scrunch' mode with 320h by 192v and 5 by 6 characters,    
   and a 'scroll' mode with 512h by 384v and 8 by 12            
   characters.  In scrunch mode the entire screen is visible at 
   once, while in scroll mode the joystick allows the user to   
   scroll a window through the larger screen area, allowing     
   about a quarter of the screen to be seen at once in the      
   higher resolution.                                           
                                                                
   Two copies of downloaded character sets are kept.  Both are  
   reduced to the appropriate size for the screen.  Image       
   processing techniques are used to preserve the quality of    
   the character in the smaller grid size.                      
                                                                
   The function keys are handled by pressing the START key and  
   a mnemonic letter (shifted if required).  For example,       
   STOP is represented by START S, and shift-DATA is entered    
   as START SHIFT D.                                            
                                                                
   If in scrunch mode, the touch panel becomes active when      
   the host sends down the appropriate SSF command.  A cursor   
   appears on the screen and the user directs the cursor to     
   the desired location.  To make the touch, the button on      
   the joystick is pressed.                                     
                                                                
   The display is two colors only, but these colors are         
   selected by the user for the best display.                   
                                                                
   A character-oriented screen print facility is planned (that  
   is, only text will be printed when a print is initiated --   
   dot graphics will not be supported).                         
                                                                
 10  Appendix F: Serial channel control                         
                                                                
   The serial channel is accessed through SSF and EXT commands, 
   either from the host or from Micro PLATO (see section        
   3.2.3.1.6).  Reading from device address 2 will read data    
   from the currently selected serial channel.  Writing to      
   device address 2 will write data to the serial channel.      
   Reading from device address 3 will return the current        
   status of the selected serial device.  Writing to device     
   3 will set up serial channel control information.  Device   
   address 4 selects the serial channel.                       
                                                               
   The following sections describe the formats for status      
   and control for the various terminals.                      
                                                               
 10.1  Generic terminals                                       
                                                               
   All terminals but the IST III use the following scheme for  
   controlling the serial ports (including the Viking 721-30). 
                                                               
 10.1.1  Control                                               
                                                               
   To control the serial port, bytes are sent to device address
   3.  Each eight-bit byte received changes a certain          
   parameter.  The top four bits of the byte indicate which    
   parameter is being set, while the lower four bits indicate  
   the value of the parameter.                                 
                                                               
   The following commands are available for controlling the    
   serial port:                                                
                                                               
   Set interrupt mask:                                         
                                                               
        b8 b7 b6 b5   b4 b3 b2 b1                              
         0  0  0  0    1  1 RD RQ                              
                                                               
                      RD                                       
                         0: Disable character ready interrupt  
                         1: Enable character ready interrupt   
                      RQ                                       
                         0: Disable character request interrupt
                         1: Enable character request interrupt 
                                                               
                                                               
   Set baud rate:                                              
                                                               
        b8 b7 b6 b5   b4 b3 b2 b1                              
         0  0  0  1   r4 r3 r2 r1                              
                                                               
                      r4, r3, r2, r1:                          
                         0 0 0 0:    75 bps                    
                         0 0 0 1:   110 bps                    
                         0 0 1 0:   150 bps                    
                         0 0 1 1:   200 bps                    
                         0 1 0 0:   300 bps                    
                         0 1 0 1:   600 bps                    
                         0 1 1 0:  1200 bps                    
                         0 1 1 1:  1800 bps                    
                         1 0 0 0:  2400 bps                    
                         1 0 0 1:  4800 bps                    
                         1 0 1 0:  9600 bps                    
                         1 0 1 1: 19200 bps                    
                         1 1 0 0: ----                         
                         1 1 0 1: ----                         
                         1 1 1 1: ----                         
                                                               
                                                               
   Select word length:                                         
        b8 b7 b6 b5   b4 b3 b2 b1                              
         0  0  1  0    X  S L2 L1                              
                      X:                                       
                         Don't care -- can be any value        
                      S:                                       
                         0: one stop bit                       
                         1: two stop bits                      
                      L2, L1:                                  
                         0 0: 5 data bits                      
                         0 1: 6 data bits                      
                         1 0: 7 data bits                      
                         1 1: 8 data bits                      
                                                               
                                                               
   Select parity:                                              
                                                               
        b8 b7 b6 b5   b4 b3 b2 b1                              
         0  0  1  1    X  X P2 P1                              
                                                               
                      P1:                                      
                         0: disable parity                     
                         1: enable parity                      
                      P2:                                      
                         0: odd parity                         
                         1: even parity                        
                                                               
                         (If parity is disabled, the state of  
                         this bit does not matter.)            
                                                               
   Modem control:                                               
                                                                
        b8 b7 b6 b5   b4 b3 b2 b1                               
         0  1  0  0    X  B  R  D                               
                                                                
                      X:                                        
                         Don't care                             
                      B:                                        
                         Turn on break (space on line)          
                      R:                                        
                         Set request to send (RTS)              
                      D:                                        
                         Set data terminal ready (DTR)          
                                                                
 10.1.2  Status                                                 
                                                                
   A single byte of status is returned when a read from device  
   address 3 is performed.  Its format is:                      
                                                                
        b8  b7  b6  b5  b4  b3  b2  b1                          
        CD  RI  DSR CTS RDE TXR BRK RXR                         
                                                                
                      RXR: Receive ready (a character is ready  
                           to receive from the serial channel)  
                      BRK: Break detected on line               
                      TXR: Transmit ready (the serial channel   
                           is ready to transmit another         
                           character)                           
                      RDE: Receive data error.  An error        
                           occurred in receiving a character.   
                           This could be due to overrun or     
                           parity error.                       
                      CTS: clear to send.                      
                      DSR: data set ready                      
                      RI:  ring indicator                      
                      CD:  carrier detect                      
                                                               
 10.2  IST III serial channel                                  
                                                               
   Only one serial channel is available on the IST III,        
   at device addresses 2 and 3.  Writing to device address     
   4 will have no effect on this terminal.                     
                                                               
 10.2.1  Control                                               
                                                               
   Controlling the IST III's serial channel requires a         
   different method.  Each parameter is set by a sequence of   
   two bytes rather than by a single byte.  The sequences      
   required for initializing the serial channel are as follows:
                                                               
        Byte 0        Byte 1        Function                   
        00000000      00011000      Resets the serial channel  
        00000010      CCC00000      Sets baud rate             
        00000100      0100SSPP      Sets stop bits and parity  
        00000011      BB000001      Set receive bits/character 
        00000101      DBBZ10R0      Sets transmit bits/        
                                    character, DTR, break and  
                                    RTS control.               
                                                               
   The meanings of the letters are:                            
                                                               
        CCC           Baud rate                                
        000             150 bps                                
        001             300 bps                                
        010             600 bps                                
        011            1200 bps                                
        100            2400 bps                                
        101            4800 bps                                
        110            9600 bps                                
        111           19200 bps                                
                                                               
        SS            Number of stop bits                      
        00            Do not use this.                         
        01            1 stop bit                               
        10            1 1/2 stop bits                          
        11            2 stop bits                              
                                                               
        BB            Bits per receive character               
        00            5                                        
        01            7                                        
        10            6 (not a typo -- 6 and 7 are this way)   
        11            8                                        
                                                               
        PP            Parity                                   
        X0            None                                     
        01            Odd                                      
        11            Even                                     
                                                               
        Z             Break                                    
        0             Off                                      
        1             On                                        
                                                                
        D             DTR                                       
        0             Off                                       
        1             On                                        
                                                                
        R             RTS                                       
        0             Off                                       
        1             On                                        
                                                                
 10.2.2  Status                                                 
                                                                
   The status on the IST III can be read from device address    
   3.  The meanings of the bits in the returned byte are:       
                                                                
        b8  b7  b6  b5  b4  b3  b2  b1                          
        BRK NDF CTS ERR DCD TXR DSR RXR                         
                                                                
        RXR = 1, receive character ready                        
        DSR = 1, data set ready                                 
        TXR = 1, ready to transmit character                    
        DCD = 1, data carrier detect                            
        ERR = 1, receive error occurred                         
        CTS = 1, clear to send                                  
        NDF = not defined, will be zero                         
        BRK = 1, break received
                                 
 11  Appendix G: Win/Mac -ext- codes                            
                                                                
   The following -ext- codes are sent by the system to pad's    
   with *ztstype* settings of 10, 13, and 14:                   
                                                                
        EXT RANGE    FUNCTION                                   
        4400b        locking superscript                        
        4401b        locking subscript                          
        4500b        -getcode- identifier for plotting box      
        4501b-4777b  -arrow- identifier for plotting box        
                     (subtract 4500b to find -long- length)     
                                                                
        5000b-5077b  -font- command identifier                  
                     (subtract 5000b for font slot number)      
        5100b-5177b  -font- size identifier                     
                     (subtract 5100b for size of font)          
        5200b-5277b  -font- mode identifier                     
                     (lower 6 bits detail mode of font)         
                                                                
        All -ext-s sent from 6001b to 6077b cause data to       
        be redirected until an -ext- 6000b is received.         
        The redirected text is the 8-char name of the file.     
        The client software will figure out the extention.      
                                                                
                                                                
        6000b        re-direct off flag                         
                                                                
                                                                
             audio files                                        
        6001b        .wav file                                  
        6002b        .voc file                                  
        6003b        .mid file                                  
         6004b        .rmi file                                
                                                              
             movie files                                      
        6010b        .avi file                                
        6011b        .mov file                                
        6012b        .qt  file                                
        6013b        .flc file                                
        6014b        .fli file                                
        6015b        .mpg file                                
                                                              
             image files                                      
        6030b        .gif file                                
        6031b        .jpg file                                
        6032b        .bmp file                                
        6033b        .pcx file                                
        6034b        .tga file                                
                                                              
 12  Change history                                           
                                                              
   01/03/84: Corrected an error in the Atari keyboard         
             description (section 9.5).                       
                                                              
   01/27/84: Corrected the definition of the erase screen     
             sequence (section 3.2.3.1.2.4.4).                
                                                              
   01/27/84: Added an omitted line in section 3.2.3.1.2.3.    
                                                              
   06/08/84: Added the additional information for the backout 
             code (section 3.2.3.1.4.5).                      
                                                                
   06/08/84: Added information on flow control: sections 3.1.4  
             and 3.2.3.1.4.9 added, sections 3.2.3.1.10,        
             3.2.3.3.1, 3.3.2, 4.2.10 and 8 updated.            
                                                                
   06/11/84: Changed a misleading bit numbering in section      
             3.2.3.3.                                           
                                                                
   06/14/84: Changed an incorrect example in section 3.1.2.4.3. 
                                                                
   08/20/84: Fixed an incorrect value for the '-' character in  
             the table in section 8.1.                          
                                                                
   02/03/86: Fixed an incorrect character for value 7C in       
             the table in section 8.1.     
                                           
  ** END OF DOCUMENT **                       
